Title: 2607.04906v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.04906v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 03:09:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
Ming -Kuan Lin , Yi -Chung Lai , Ming -Hsin Chiang , Tsung -Wei Pan, Jung -Hua Wang* 

Abstract —Under the Shipping 4.0 paradigm, autonomous and reduced -crew vessels require intelligent internal systems to ensure 

operational safety and structural stability. Ballast -water control is essential for maintaining ship trim and integrity, yet conventional 

ru le -based logic and manual operations have limited adaptability to unexpected hydraulic anomalies, such as valve failures or pipe 

blockages, and often require dense pressure or flow sensors for diagnosis. To address these limitations, this paper proposes RL -

Ballast, a graph -based deep reinforcement learning framework for adaptive ballast -water path planning and sensor -frugal blockage 

candidate scoring. The framework converts the valve -permutation problem into 54 feasible fluid -transfer routes generated by gr aph 

theory and depth -first search. It approximates the partially observable ballast environment using frame -stacked tank levels and 

action outcomes, enabling the agent to infer hidden blockage effects without explicitly modeling a high -dimensional POMDP. 

Episode -level failed -action memory and dynamic action masking are integrated during deterministic inference to prevent repeated 

ineffective actions and support immediate rerouting. Failed transfer histories are accumulated to rank suspicious valves or p ipe 

segments without dense flow or pressure instrumentation. Monte Carlo evaluations in a simulated ballast system show that RL -

Ballast completes all unexpected single -blockage scenarios. Compared with a Dijkstra rule -based baseline, it reduces the average 

dec ision steps from 61.0 to 41.5. For diagnostic support, the failure -history scoring scheme achieves a 100% Top -3(hit ) rate, a 66.7% 

strict Top -1(hit) rate, and an 83.3% Top -1(tie -hit ) rate under serially indistinguishable blockage conditions. These results indicate that 

RL -Ballast provides adaptive rerouting and maintenance -oriented blockage diagnosis under limited sensing conditions. 

Ke ywords —Ballast Water Management, Deep Reinforceme nt Learning, Double DQN, Action Masking, Blockage Candidate 

Scoring , Maritime Autonomous Systems. 

Submitted on June. 30 , 2026 for review, this work was supported in part by the Ship and Ocean Industries R&D Center (SOIC) . (Corresponding author: Jung -Hua 

Wang). 

Jung -Hua Wang is with the AI Research Center, National Taiwan Ocean University , Keelung 20224, Taiwan (jhwang@email.ntou.edu.tw ).

Ming -Hsin Chiang was with Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan Ocean University , Keelung 20224, Taiwan . He is now with Shinsoft 

Corporation , Taiwan (ac872xy@gmail.com ).

Yi -Chung Lai was with Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 20224, Taiwan. He is now with AI Res earch Center (e -

mail:  k8130488@gmail.com ). 

Ming -Kuan Lin is currently with Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 20224, Taiwan (e -mail: 

jacksonlin092@gmail.com ). 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Under the Shipping 4.0 paradigm, the maritime industry is moving toward digitalized, intelligent, and increasingly autonomous 

vessel operations (Sulli van et al., 2021, 2020) . Considerable progress has been made in autonomous navigation, collision avoidance, 

trajectory tracking, and route optimization. However, practical ship autonomy requires not only external navigational intelli gence 

but also relia ble control of internal onboard systems. These internal systems are critical for maintaining vessel safety, operational 

continuity, and reduced -crew ship management. 

Among onboard internal systems, the ballast -water piping system is a critical network of p ipes, valves, and pumps on a vessel 

used to load, transfer, and discharge seawater. It ensures structural integrity, controls trim and stability, and integrates with a Ballast 

Water Treatment System (BWTS) to prevent the spread of invasive species. During loading, unloading, voyage, and special 

operations, ballast conditions must be adjusted to maintain a safe vessel attitude and structural balance. Improper ballast operations 

may result in excessive hull stress, poor trim, reduced maneuverability, or hazar dous stability conditions. Therefore, intelligent 

ballast water control is a fundamental requirement for future autonomous and reduced -crew vessels. 

In current maritime practice, ballast operations are predominantly executed via manual control or fixed pro grammable logic 

controller (PLC) sequences. While effective under nominal operating conditions, these rule -based approaches presuppose the total 

functionality of all pumps, valves, and pipelines. This assumption introduces operational vulnerabilities in ag ing vessels, where 

biofouling, sediment accumulation, and valve degradation frequently cause unforeseen flow restrictions. When such anomalies 

# RL -Ballast: Ship Ballast Water Path Planning and Clog 

# Prediction via Reinforcement Learning occur, rigid operational sequences often repeatedly execute ineffective transfer routes, leaving human operators to infer system 

faults from delayed or stagnant tank -level dynamics. Compounding this challenge, the sparse sensor instrumentation of most 

existing vessels, which lack dense pressure or flow instrumentation along individual pipe segments, renders direct fa ult localization 

difficult . Consequently, fault diagnosis is restricted to indirect inference from macroscopic observations (e.g., volumetric tank 

variations), making the process time -consuming and heavily reliant on operator intuition. To mitigate these limitations, there is a 

cri tical need for a sensor -frugal framework capable of both adaptively rerouting ballast water under unknown blockage or clogging 

conditions and localizing clogs from sparse operational data. Recent literature has leveraged machine learning for shipboard flui d-

system diagnostics and rupture detection . However, these studies primarily use supervised and semi -supervised learning for 

detection (Ferreno -Gonzalez et al., 2025; Velasco -Gallego et al., 2024) and rely heavily on continuous time -series data from 

standa rd automation systems, such as pump motor current, rotational speed, power consumption, and inlet/outlet pressures. Besides, 

they focus on isolated classification or detection tasks rather than sequential routing optimization .

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto, 2018) provides a promising approach for this type of sequential decision -

making problem. Unlike supervised learning methods, which usually require labeled fault datasets, an RL agent can learn contr ol 

policies through interaction with a simulated ballast environ ment. By selecting different water -transfer paths and observing whether 

the target tank levels increase, the agent can gradually learn to avoid ineffective routes and search for alternative paths. Moreover, 

failed transfer attempts provide useful diagnosti c evidence because repeated failures involving common valves or pipe segments 

may indicate potential blockage locations. In recent decades, although RL has been widely investigated in maritime applications 

such as autonomous surface vessel control, collis ion avoidance, and trajectory tracking, most existing studies have focused on 

external navigational tasks. The application of RL to internal shipboard fluid systems remains relatively underexplored. 

Furthermore, existing fault diagnosis methods for shipboa rd systems often rely on dense sensing or labeled fault data and usually 

do not actively reconfigure the control policy after a fault is detected. Few studies have jointly addressed adaptive ballast -water 

path planning and blockage inference under unknown blockage and limited sensing conditions. 

To bridge this gap, this paper introduces RL -Ballast , a graph -based RL framework designed for dynamic path planning and 

blockage candidate ranking within maritime ballast water systems. The framework first models th e ballast piping network as a 

topology -constrained graph, deriving feasible water -transfer paths as discrete actions. The ballast routing challenge is formulated 

as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP), where an RL agent is trained to sel ect optimal valve -operation paths 

based on tank -level observations and transfer outcomes (Bellman, 1957; Kaelbling et al., 1998). To counter the partial observability 

introduced by hidden blockages, RL -Ballast integrates episode -level failed -action memory alongside dynamic action masking 

during inference. Furthermore, the system analyzes historical transfer failures to calculate blockage suspicion scores for th e specific 

valves and pipe segments associated with unsuccessful paths. 

The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows: (C1) A topology -constrained graph representing feasible 

water -transfer paths, given a vessel’s ballast piping layout, can be automatically generated to enable discrete reinforcement learning 

actions. (C2) A n RL agent specially tailored for dynamic path planning and blockage candidate ranking is designed to perform 

adaptive ballast -water transfer under unknown blockage conditions. (C3) An episode -level failed -action memory and dynamic 

action masking mechanism can avoid repeated selection of ineffective (likely clogged) paths during deterministic inference. (C4) 

A failure history -based blockage candidate scoring method is designed to i nfer possible clogged valves or pipe segments from 

unsuccessful transfer attempts, providing sensor -efficient diagnostic support. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews related studies on reinforcement learning for maritim e

systems, shipboard internal system resilience, and fault diagnosis in fluid systems. Section III formulates the ballast water transfer 

problem using graph representation and reinforcement learning. Section IV describe s how to tailor a n RL agent for path p lanning 

and blockage candidate ranking , failed -action memory, dynamic action masking, and blockage c andidate scoring method. Section 

V reports the simulation experiments and performance analysis. Section VI discusses the implications, limitations, and future 

extensions of the proposed method. Finally, Section VII concludes this paper. 

II. RELATED WORK 

A. Reinforcement Learning for Maritime and Shipboard Systems 

RL has been extensively investigated for maritime autonomous systems, particularly in navigation -related tasks. Existing studies 

have applied RL to autonomous surface vessel trajectory tracking (Wang et al., 2023) , collision avoidance (Li et al., 2025) , route 

planni ng (Geng et al., 2020) , and COLREGs -compliant decision -making (Kufoalor et al., 2019) . These problems are naturally 

formulated as sequential decision -making tasks, where an agent must select control actions in uncertain and dynamic maritime 

environments. Recent reviews of RL -based collision avoidance for unmanned surface vehicles further i ndicate that value -based, 

policy -based, and multi -agent RL methods have become important tools for autonomous maritime decision -making. Despite these 

advances, most existing maritime RL studies focus on external ship behaviors, such as heading control, tra jectory following, 

obstacle avoidance, or ship -to -ship interaction (Sarhadi et al., 2022) . The control targets are usually rudder angle, propulsion, heading, speed, or collision -avoidance maneuvers. In contrast, the present study focuses on an internal shipboar d fluid system, 

where the agent must select feasible ballast -water transfer paths under unknown blockage conditions. Therefore, the problem 

addressed in this paper differs from conventional maritime navigation problems in terms of state representation, act ion definition, 

physical constraints, and fault observability. 

As a specialized subfield of RL, DRL us es deep neural networks to approximate value functions, policies, or both, enabling 

agents to learn from high -dimensional or complex state representation s. Beyond external navigation, recent studies have begun to 

explore the use of DRL for internal shipboard cyber –physical systems. Liu et al. (2026) investigated DRL -based resilient 

restoration of ship cyber –physical systems under uncertain cyberattack scenarios. Their work models cascading failure propagation 

between communication networks and physical power topology, and uses a masked reinforcement learning strategy to support 

constrained restoration and load recovery decisions. At first glance, t his line of research is relevant to our problem at hand because 

it demonstrates the potential of DRL for adaptive decision -making in shipboard internal syst ems rather than only for navigation. 

However, the target system and failure mechanisms are different from those considered in this study. Shipboard power restorat ion 

focuses on electrical topology reconfiguration, load recovery, and cyberattack -induced cas cading failures. In contrast, ballast -water 

path planning involves hydraulic routing, tank -level responses, valve -operation paths, and blockage -induced no -flow conditions .

Hence, a dditional modeling strategies are required to represent ballast piping topol ogy, detect ineffective transfer paths, and infer 

possible blockage candidates from limited observations. 

B. AI and RL for Hydraulic and Ballast -Water Operations 

General RL methods ha ve also been explored in hydraulic and water distribution networks (Hu et al., 2020) , which share several 

structural similarities with ballast p iping systems, such as network topology, valve operation, pump scheduling, and flow -related 

constraints. Recent reviews on RL for water resource management indicate that RL is suitable for optimizing sequential decisi on -

making problems in water systems, an d that DRL methods such as Deep Q -Network ( DQN ) (Mnih et al., 2015 ) ar e frequently 

used because many control actions can be discretized. In water distribution networks, DRL has been investigated for pressure 

control, leakage management, valve scheduling, and pump operation. These studies show that DRL can support operational 

decision -making in nonlinear hydraulic systems with large action s paces and uncertainty. However, most water distribution studies 

are designed for land -based municipal infrastructure, where the objectives are typically pressure regulation, leakage reduction, 

energy efficiency, or contaminant isolation. Ship ballast water systems differ in that the network is embedded in a vessel, the 

operational objective is tank -level transfer for stability -related tasks, and blockage may be inferred only indirectly from tank -level 

stagnation. Therefore, existing hydraulic -network RL met hods cannot be directly applied without ship -specific graph modeling, 

path -based action design, and failed -action -based blockage inference. 

Artificial intelligence (AI) has also been applied to ballast -water management systems, particularly for optimizing treatment 

performance and ensuring environmental compliance. For example, online machine learning algorithms have been proposed to 

continuously update prediction models using sensor data from ships and ports, with the goal of improving ballast water treatm ent 

systems that use filtration and ultraviolet disinfection. These studies are important for biological treatment and regulatory 

compliance of ballast water discharge. However, they address a different aspect of ballast -water management from the present 

study. This paper focuses on the operational control of ballast -water transfer inside the ship piping network, particularly dynamic 

path selection and blockage inference under unknown blockage conditions. Therefore, the proposed method complements existing 

AI -based BWMS studies by addressing the hydraulic routing and fault -aware control aspect of ballast operations. 

C. Fault Diagnosis in Shipboard fluid Systems 

Fault detection and diagnosis for shipboard fluid systems has also received increasing attention . For ballast -water systems, graph -

based deep learning has been explored for fault diagnosis. For example, multi -feature fusion graph convolution methods (Ai et al., 

20 24) have been proposed to represent ballast -system fault data using probabilistic and correlation topology graphs, allowing graph 

neural networks to extract structural fault features. Similar data -driven approaches have also been investigated for other shipbo ard 

fluid systems. Ferreño -González et al. (2025) studied pipe rupture detection in a shipboard saltwater firefighting system using 

pressure sensor data and machine learning/deep learning models to distinguish normal and abnormal operating states and locat e

pipe faults. Deep learning has also been applied to ship pipeline valve leak diagnosis, where end -to -end feature extra ction is used 

to improve fault identification compared with traditional expert -based diagnosis. 

Although these studies demonstrate the effectiveness of data -driven fault diagnosis, they are usually formulated as passive 

monitoring or classification problem s. They often require sufficient labeled fault data (Velasco -Gallego et al., 2024), pressure 

measurements, or sensor arrays. In many existing vessels, dense deployment of pressure or flow sensors along every pipe segme nt 

is impractical. Moreover, detecting a fault does not necessarily provide an adaptive control strategy to bypass the fault. In contrast, 

the present study integrates control and diagnosis: failed transfer attempts are used not only as negative rewards for reinfo rcement 

learning but also as d iagnostic evidence for ranking possible blockage candidates. 

D. Research Gap and Algorithmic Rationale 

RL algorithms are broadly categorized into value -based, policy -based, and actor –critic methods. Value -based methods , such as 

DQN and Double DQN (DDQN) (Hasselt et al., 2016) , learn a state - or action -value function to derive an optimal policy, making 

them well -suited for discrete action -selection problems. Policy -based methods , such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), 

directly optimize a parameterized policy, offering stab le updates for continuous or stochastic control tasks. Actor –critic methods combine both approaches —using an actor to optimize the policy and a critic to estimate the value function , which reduces variance 

while retaining direct policy optimization. Repres entative examples include A3C and Soft Actor -Critic (SAC). 

Recent reviews (Terven, 2025) emphasize that no single RL algorithm is universally optimal; selection depends heavily on 

the problem structure, action space, and deployment environment. Given that shipboard ballast -water route planning is naturally 

formulated as a finite, discrete action -selection task —where each action corresponds to a graph -generated feasible transfer path ,

this study adopts a value -based deep RL framework. DQN is selected due to its proven success in discrete control and its 

foundational roots in temporal difference learning. To address the inherent overestimation bias of standard DQN, this study 

incorporates DDQN, which decouples action selection from action evaluation. While the DQN family includes various powerful 

extensions (e.g., Dueling DQN, Prioritized Experience Replay, Distributional DQN, and Rainbow DQN) and has even inspired 

continuous -action variants like QT -Opt (Kalashnikov et al., 2018 ), the baseline DQN and DDQN arch itectures provide a highly 

interpretable and extensible foundation for topology -constrained routing. This setup effectively solves the immediate graph -based 

routing problem while leaving room for future extensions, such as continuous valve control or actor –critic method s.

While existing studies provide important foundations, several critical gaps remain: (1) Scope of Maritime RL: Prior research 

predominantly focuses on external navigation, collision avoidance, and motion control. While recent cyber –physical studies 

leverage DRL for internal system resilience, they target electrical power restoration rather than hydraulic ballast transfer; (2) Fault 

Diagnosis vs. Active Control: Existing fault -diagnosis methods for shipboard fluid systems rely heavily on sup ervised learning, 

labeled data, or dense sensor networks, and they rarely reconfigure the control policy after a fault is detected ; (3) Domain 

Misalignment: RL -based hydraulic control literature focuses almost exclusively on land -based water distribution n etworks, which 

cannot directly accommodate ship -specific ballast objectives or blockage inference. Consequently, the integration of graph -based 

path generation, adaptive routing, dynamic failed -action masking, and failure history -based blockage scoring under unknown 

conditions remains insufficiently explored. 

To the best of our knowledge, this study introduces the first RL -based framework specifically engineered for shipboard 

ballast -water transfer routing under unknown blockage and limited sensi ng conditions. Departing from traditional maritime RL 

applications , such as trajectory tracking or vessel stability, the proposed RL -Ballast framework targets internal piping operations. 

It uniquely integrates graph -based feasible path generation, value -ba sed adaptive routing, failed -action memory, dynamic action 

masking, and failure history -based blockage candidate scoring to achieve fault -aware, resilient ballast -water transfer. 

III. SYSTEM MODELING AND PROBLEM FORMULATION 

To apply RL to a physical piping network, we must first abstract the physical infrastructure into a computationally viable 

mathematical model. To achieve this, we employ graph theory to represent the network's topology and utilize a Markov decision 

process ( MDP ) to m odel the underlying control problem. 

A. Topology -Constrained Directed Graph 

To computationally tackle the fluid routing problem, a physical ship ballast piping network is treated as a directed topology -

constrained graph denoted as G = (V, E) . The vertex set V encompasses all functional components and is partitioned into four 

distinct subsets: V=V tank 

∪Vvalve 

∪Vpump 

∪Vnode , representing ballast tanks, operable valves, water pumps, and passive pipe jun ctions, 

respectively. The edge set E

⊆ V × V represents the physical pipe segments connecting these components. 

Unlike passive land -based water distribution networks, shipboard ballast transfer is highly dependent on active pump actuation, 

which imposes strict directionality on fluid flow. Consequently, the graph is represented by an adjacency matrix 𝑀 ∈ ℝ|𝑣 |×|𝑣 |,

wher e mij =1 if a hydraulically viable direct connection exists from vertex 𝑖 to vertex 𝑗 , and mij =0 otherwise. While high -fidelity 

computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models capture transient micro -turbulence, such approaches are computationally prohibitive 

for real -time shipboard control. In contrast , this study emphasizes topological feasibility or viability . A viable water -transfer path 

𝑝 is defined as a sequence of vertices p = (v 1, v2, …, v k) that satisfies a set of operational constraints R=R edge 

∪ Rpath , namely, 𝑅 

include s both edge -level and path -level feasibility rules. Edge -level constraints are related to whether a directed edge can be added 

to the graph, while path -level constraints determine whether an enumerated route can be accepted as a viable path .

More gener ally, edge -level constraints could be affected by pump direction, valve availability and kno wn operational 

restrictions , while path -level constraints could include : (1) Boundary Constraint: An effective path sequence must originate from 

a source tank (v1

∈ Vtank ) or a starting pump and terminate at a distinct destination tank (vk

∈ Vtank ). (2) Actuation Constraint: The 

path must intersect at least one active pump (𝑝 ∩ 𝑉 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 ≠ ∅) to provide the necessa ry water supply . By applying these constraints, 

the graph representation effectively filters out physically infeasible valve permutations. Each validated, effective path uniquely 

corresponds to a synchronized array of binary valve -operation commands. These commands are then encoded as a discrete action 

within the RL framework discussed in Section IV. Ultimately, an optimally trained RL agent learns to avoid ineffective paths, 

selecting instead the most efficient sequence from all feasible paths to complete the ballast operation. To automate the generation of all f easible water -transfer paths, Algorithm 1 first applies the edge -level constraint set Redge to 

construct the directed adjacency matrix; path -level constraints are then used to filter the enumerated candidate paths. After 

candidate paths are enumerated from the adjacency matrix, Rpath is applied to determine whether each path satisfies the boundary, 

actuation , and other known constraints. Algorithm 1 is designed to transf orm any piping topology into a directed graph , from 

which all feasible water -transfer paths are generated . Using Fig.1 as an illustrative example, BP_01 and BP_02 are assumed to be 

the starting pumps for simplicity. By Algorithm 1 , the ballast piping network can be automatically converted to all feasible paths 

(see Fig. 2 ). If there is any path violating this rule , it would be removed by the path -level constraints. After generating all the 

feasible paths, we would represent each path with a directed graph, which is then stored as computational data structures such as 

an adja cency matri x or adjacency list. 

The topological abstraction can be understood via the green curve highlighted in Fig. 1, which mirrors the pathway in the 

topmost row of Fig. 2(a) starting from pump BP_02, routing through valves SW_709V and BW_05, and ending at target tank 

DB_07. Across t he system architecture, path depths fluctuate, commonly encompassing four, five, or more nodes. By translating 

this physical layout into a directed graph, the ballast tracking task is reformulated from an intractable valve -combination challenge 

into a disc rete path -selection problem, optimizing the action space for the RL agent. 

Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for automatically generating all po ssible water -transfer paths from ballast water piping topology 

Input: Component list 𝐶 , Pipe segment list 𝐿 , Operational constrain ts R = Redge 

∪ Rpath 

Output: Directed graph G = (V, E ), Adjacency matrix/list Adj 

Initialization: 𝑉 ← ∅; 𝐸 ← ∅; Adj  ← empty dictionary 

for each component c

∈ C do 

Create node vc

Store node attributes: ID, component type, location, operational status 

𝑉 ← 𝑉 ∪ {𝑣 𝑐 }; 𝐴𝑑𝑗 [𝑣 𝑐 ] ← ∅

end for 

for each pipe segment l

∈ L do 

Extract the connected components cstart and cend 

𝑉 ← 𝑉 ∪ {𝑣 𝑐 }; 𝐴𝑑𝑗 [𝑣 𝑐 ] ← ∅

end for 

for each pipe segment l

∈ L do 

Extract the connected components cstart and cend 

Decide flow directions according to: pump direction, valve orientation, source -to -tank transfer direction, operational rules 

if flow is allowed from cstart to cend then 

𝐸 ← 𝐸 ∪ {(𝑐 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 , 𝐶 𝑒𝑛𝑑 )}

𝐴𝑑𝑗 [𝑐 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 ] ← 𝐴𝑑𝑗 [𝑐 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 ] ∪ {𝑐 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 }

end if 

if reverse flow is allowed from cend to cstart then 

𝐸 ← 𝐸 ∪ {(𝑐 𝑒𝑛𝑑 , 𝑐 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 )}

𝐴𝑑𝑗 [𝑐 𝑒𝑛𝑑 ] ← 𝐴𝑑𝑗 [𝑐 𝑒𝑛𝑑 ] ∪ {𝑐 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 }

end if 

end for 

Apply edge -level operational constraints Redge 

Remove edges that violate pump direction, valve availability, or know n operational rules 

Apply path -level operational constraints Rpath 

Remove the path that violates boundary constraints and actuation constraints 

Return G = (V, E), Adj Topological viability does not guarantee successful ballast transfer under unmodeled blockage conditions. A path may satisfy 

all predefined topological and operational constraints but still produce no -flow behavior due to localized blockage , sediment 

accumu lation, or valve malfunction. If all hydraulic and blockage states were directly observable, the system could be modeled as 

an MDP. However, because blockage locations and latent valve conditions cannot be directly monitored from tank -level 

measurements, t he practical decision problem is inherently partially observable. Solving the exact POMDP would require 

maintaining and updating a belief state over all possible hidden blockage configurations, which is computationally prohibitiv e for 

the proposed ballast -routing setting. Therefore, this study adopts a practical MDP approximation by augmenting observable tank -

level states with recent action -outcome histories. This approximation allows the RL agent to select feasible transfer paths based on 

available observa tions while preserving computational tractability for the control loop , effectively augmenting raw tank data with 

a temporal sequence of past action outcomes. This design also enables the agent to assess system variables at each interval, select 

an optimal discrete path, and learn from subsequent tank -level differentials and reward feedback. The following section elaborates 

the MDP formulation , covering states, actions, reward engineering, transitions, and terminal conditions. 

Figure 1.  An exemplar blast piping layout . The g reen  curve represents the path at the topmost row in Fig.2(a). 

Figure 2. (a) The directed graph of all feasible paths generated by applying  Algorithm 1  to the piping topology in Fig.1 ;

(b) The adjacency matrix corresponding to the feasible  path at the top row of Fig.2(a). B. Approximati ng POMDP as MDP 

A standard POMDP solver requires maintaining and continuously updating a belief state, which represents a probability 

distribution over all possible hidden parameters. For a ballast system with N valves, the combinatorial space of hidden blockage 

state s reaches 2N combinations , even under single -blockage assumptions , and scales exponentially in multi -blockage scenarios. 

Calculating and updating this massive belief state matrix at each decision step far exceeds the computational limits of onboa rd 

hardwar e, introducing unacceptable latency bottlenecks for critical stability operations. Consequently, directly solving a high -

dimensional POMDP is computationally prohibitive, making it unsuitable for real -time inference on resource -constrained 

shipboard edge c omputing devices. 

To overcome this bottleneck, we draw inspiration from the frame stacking strategy in DQN , where the issue of partial 

observability is tackled by augmenting tank -level observations with recent action -outcome histories. Thus , we can cast the 

autonomous fluid transfer problem as an MDP, denoted by the tuple ( S, A, R, P, 

). By defining the state space strictly around 

observable macroscopic hydraulic metrics, we maintain computational tractability for the control loop, while explicitly deleg ating 

the resolution of hidden topological states (i.e., blockage locations) to the diagnostic module detailed in Section IV. The specific 

components of our MDP are defined as follows: 

State Space (S): To ensure vessel safe ty, the observation state st

∈ S at time step t must reflect both the internal hydraulic conditions 

and the external vessel attitude. We define the continuous state vector as st = [l1, l2, …, lm] T, where li ∈ (0,100%] represents the 

normalize d liquid level of the i-th ballast tank . However, because internal pipe blockages are unobservable latent variables, a single 

static snapshot provides insufficient information to detect stagnant flow. To restore a pseudo -Markovian property, we apply a 

frame -stacking mechanism. The augmented state vector st ∈ S fed into the RL agent is constructed by concatenating the current 

observation with the history of preceding k steps of observations and actions. Formally, it is expressed as: st = [ot, at-1, ot-1, at-2, ot-

> 2

, …, at-k, ot-k]. In this study, the temporal window length is set to k = 4. This sequential trajectory provides critical hydraulic 

transition gradients, allowing the agent to implicitly infer flow rates and path blo ckages. Note that global vessel stability (heel and 

trim) is managed at the supervisory level by defining symmetric target states (e.g., filling Port and Starboard tanks simulta neously), 

allowing the RL agent to focus exclusively on optimal hydraulic routing and fault avoidance. 

Action Space ( A): To achieve computational tractability and ensure physical validity, we employ a Depth -First Search (DFS) 

algorithm (Tarjan, 1972 ) based on the adjacency matrix to pre -calculate all feasible paths. An action at

∈ A thus corresponds to 

selecting a specific valid path, which translates into a synchronized array of valve actuations, drastically reducing the 

dimensionality of the action space. 

Reward Function ( R): The reward function is the core driver of the agent's routing efficiency and diagnostic function . Instead of 

a simple scalar, the immediate reward rt is engineered as a multi -objective piecewise function to balance task completion, 

mechanical preservation, and fault identification . De note f as the number of target tanks are full in the current step; n the number 

of targeted tanks ; s the number of tanks with a static water level , and i the number of target tanks successfully be filled in current 

step. Therefore, the number of intended recipient tanks is given by n = f + i + s. The switching indicator is defined as t = 0 while 

the current action is same as last action, otherwise it would be 1. 

𝑟 𝑡 =

{

𝑅 𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐 , if all target tanks are full 

𝑅 𝑓𝑖𝑙𝑙 , if 𝑓 > 0

𝑃 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑔 , if 𝑛 = 𝑠 

𝛼𝑖 − 𝛽𝑠 − 𝜆𝑡 , otherwise 

, (1)

where Rsucc and Rfill represent the reward if all target tanks are already full when f>0, respectively; Pclog is activated only when the 

intended tanks experience stagnation; Eq. ( 1) is designed to provide parametric insensitivity while preserv ing the intended 

preference order among different operating outcomes. First, Rsucc must be greater than the intermediate filling reward Rfill ,

considering the completi on of all target ballast tanks represents the ultimate objective of the ballast task. Second, the no -flow 

penalty Pclog should have the most negative reward value in Eq. ( 1) . In other words, any action that results in a measurable f illing 

progress should receive a higher reward than a completely ineffective clogged condition, even if the action incurs static -tank or 

switching penalties. In short , Eq. (1) must satisfy Rsucc > Rfill and Pclog < αi −βs −λt < Rsucc . If these two constraints are not met, the 

agent may learn an undesirable policy and avoid changing actions to reduce the switching penalty, even when no target ballast tank 

receives water. By assigning the clogged no -flow condition the largest negative penalty, the rew ard function encourages the agent 

to abandon ineffective routes and search for alternative feasible transfer paths. Unless otherwise stated, the default setting for (Rsucc ,

Pclog ,

 ,

 ,

) is (10, -0.5, 0.01, 0.07, 0.05 ). 

C. Optimization Objective an d Operational Assumptions 

To formulate a computationally tractable model while preserving the core hydrodynamic behaviors necessary for training the RL 

agent, the following operational assumptions are established for a simulated maritime environment: (1) Incompressible Fluid and 

Quasi -Steady Flow : The ballast water is treated as an incompressible fluid. The hydrodynamic transitions between states are approximated as quasi -steady, focusing on macroscopic volumetric changes and stat ic stability rather than transient micro -

turbulence , (2) Binary Valve Actuation : For topological pathfinding, the controllable valves (Vcont ) are modeled as binary 

mechanisms (i.e., fully open ed or fully closed). Partial throttling is beyond the scope of t his discrete action space and is reserved 

for future continuous -control studies ; (3) Sensor Noise Abstraction : While real -world tank level sensors are susceptible to wave -

induced sloshing, this preliminary framework abstracts external environmental noise to isolate and validate the topological 

blockage prediction mechanism. Building upon this MDP framework, the ult imate objective of the reinforcement learning agent is 

to discover an optimal policy 𝜋 ∗ that maps states to actions in a manner that maximizes the expected cumulative discounted reward. 

Mathematically, this optimization objective is defined as: 

𝐽 (𝜋 ) = 𝐸 𝜋 [∑ 𝛾 𝑡 𝑟 𝑡 

> ∞
> 𝑡 =0

] , (2)

where 𝛾 ∈ [0,1] is the discount factor that dictates the agent’s foresight, prioritizing immediate stability and task completion while 

ensuring long -term sequence validity . Eq. (2) serves as the foundation for training DQN detailed in Section IV .

IV. METHODOLOGY 

To solve the topology -constrained MDP defined in Section III and maximize the expected return J(π) of Eq. (2) , traditional heuristic 

controllers, such as Proportional -Integral -Derivative (PID) loops or PLC -based hardcoded logic, are inadequate. This insufficiency 

stems from their inability to adapt to the highly non -linear topology transformations induced by stochastic pipe blockages. To 

address this limitation, we introduce RL -Ballast , a framework combining rein forcement learning (RL) with other custom module s

(green blocks in Fig.3) . While this work utilizes a DQN as the exemplar RL agent for illustrative purposes, the framework 

architecture is agnostic to the underlying RL algorithm and can seamlessly accommoda te alternative models. As illustrated in Fig. 

3, the RL -Ballast framework architecturally comprises six interconnected modules: 

1. Environment Module : Models the ballast piping topology, generates feasible fluid -transfer paths to establish the discrete 

action space, simulates tank -level state transitions, and injects stochastic blockage conditions during training and evaluation. 

To stabilize and accelerate convergence, a performance -based blockage curriculum is integrated into this module, which 

dynamically scales the difficulty of the blockage scenarios based on the agent's moving task success rate. 

2. Frame -Stacking Module : Augments the instantaneous system observation with a temporal sequence of historical states. 

Because internal pipe blockages are latent variables not directly observable via localized tank -level measurements, a static 

state snapshot provides insufficient information to differentiate viable transfer paths from obstructed ones. By temporal ly 

stacking of consecutive observations an d action -outcome pairs, the agent can infer the underlying hydrodynamic state and 

assess whether previous actions yielded meaningful volumetric progress. 

3. DQN -based Agent (the red block in Fig.3) : Receives the stacked state representation to estimate the st ate -action value 

function ( Q-value ) across all valid transfer -path actions. This agent adapts the canonical DQN architecture by tailoring two 

core components: Experience Replay and Target Networks. During the training phase, the agent balances exploration and 

exploitation via an ε-greedy policy, updating its parameterized policy network through experience replay sampling and 

periodic target network synchronization. During deterministic inference, the policy selects the action maximizing the 

estimated Q-valu e within the constrained action space. 

4. Episodic Failure Memory : Records actions executed and flagged as ineffective within the current episode. Specifically, if a 

selected transfer path fails to generate a measurable variance in tank levels, the correspond ing action is logged as a failure. 

This module captures transient, fault -related information localized to the current deployment episode without necessitating 

parameter updates or fine -tuning of the primary DQN weights. 

5. Action Masking Module : Leverages the data logged in the Episodic Failure Memory to dynamically prune the action space, 

preventing the agent from re -selecting previously obstructed paths. Consequently, actions associated with fully processed 

tanks or verified transfer failures are excluded fr om the candidate action set during inference. 

6. Di agnostic Module : Converts failed transfer histories into blockage -candidate rankings. When a transfer path produces no 

measurable tank -level increase, the module records the involved valves and pipe segments and updates their failure counts. 

Components that repeatedly appear in failed paths receive higher suspicion scores. 

Together, these modules allow RL -Ballast to perform adaptive routing while simultaneously accumulating physically interpretable 

evidence f or blockage -candidate diagnosis. A. Action Space Pruning and System Workflow of RL -Ballast 

The performance of RL -Ballast depends on how well the DQN can approximat e the optimal action -value function Q* (s,a) ≈

Q(s,a;θ) , where θ represents the weights of the neural network. Recall that the computational challenge in applying RL to complex 

piping systems is the combinatorial explosion of the action space. Thus, f eeding all possible valve permutations into the DQN 

would severely hinder network convergence . To a ddress this bottleneck, the output layer of our DQN avoids issuing individual 

valve commands altogether. Instead, it leverages the DFS algorithm, operating on the system's adjacency matrices, to pre -calculate 

a discrete set of valid topological paths Avali d. Consequently, the DQN only needs to output Q -values for these dynamically feasible 

paths, reducing the action space dimensionality by several orders of magnitude. 

As indicated in Fig . 3, the DQ N is designed to be strictly governed by the physical parameters of the ballast system. The 

complete training process, which ensures that the DQN conforms to the ballast -water planning constraints, is detailed in Algorithm 

2. To capture non -linear hydraulic relationships and state transitions, the n etwork utilizes two fully connected hidden layers with 

Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activations. Crucially, to resolve the combinatorial explosion of raw valve permutations, the ou tput 

layer dimension is explicitly constrained to match the 54 feasible path s predefined by the DFS algorithm. A linear activation 

function is applied at this terminal layer to generate continuous Q -value estimates for each discrete topological action, thereby 

Algorithm 2: Pseudo code of DQN -based agent Training for Ballast Water Path Planning 

Input: Ballast piping graph G, action set A, maximum episodes E, maximum steps T

Initialize DQN network 𝑄 (𝑠 , 𝑎 ; 𝜃 )

Initialize target network 𝑄 (𝑠 , 𝑎 ; 𝜃 −)

Initialize replay buffer D

for episode = 1 to E do 

Reset environment and obtain initial state 𝑠 0

for 𝑡 = 1 to T do 

Select action at using ϵ-greedy policy 

Execute action at in the ballast environment 

Observe reward 𝑟 𝑡 , next state 𝑠 𝑡 +1 and terminal flag done 

Store transition (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑠 𝑡 +1, 𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒 ) in D

Sample a minibatch from D

Update θ by minimizing the temporal -difference loss (TD error) 

Periodically update target network 𝜃 −

if done then 

break 

end if 

end for 

end for 

Figure  1. Integrating DQN with frame -stacking module, environment module, episodic failure  memory, action 

masking , and  diagnostic  module to construct  RL -Ballast. ensuring computational efficiency for shipboard edge deployment. The ne twork is trained by minimizing the loss function L(θ) 

using a custom experience replay buffer D:

𝐿 (𝜃 ) = 𝔼 (𝑠 ,𝑎 ,𝑟 ,𝑠 ′)~𝐷 [(𝑟 + 𝛾 max  

> 𝑎 ′

𝑄 (𝑠 , 𝑎 ; 𝜃 −) − 𝑄 (𝑠 , 𝑎 ; 𝜃 ))2

] , (3)

where θ− denotes the parameters of a periodically updated target network, ensuring training stability in the simulated environment. 

Note that the standard DQN is known to suffer from an overestimation bias due to the use of Eq. (3) that invokes the same target 

network to both select and evaluate an action. To mitigate this issue and further enhan ce learning stability, we also implement ed a

DDQN variant as a comparative baseline. DDQN decouples action selection from evaluation by utilizing a main network (θ) to 

select the greedy action, and a target network ( θ−) to evaluate its value. 

𝑌 𝐷𝐷𝑄𝑁 = 𝑟 + 𝛾𝑄 (𝑠 ′, 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎 𝑥 𝑎 ′ 𝑄 (𝑠 ′, 𝑎 ′; 𝜃 −); 𝜃 −) (4)

In Eq. (4) , the loss function for the DDQN agent replaces the standard target with Y DDQN . Both DQN and DDQN architectures are 

evaluated in our experiments to demonstrate the implementation flexibi lity of R L-Ballast . Direct optimization of the policy π* over 

a high -dimensional state space to maximize the expected cumulative return J(π) is computationally intractable. Our framework 

circumvents this bottleneck through an indirect optimization pathway . We systematically minimize a surrogate loss function, L(θ) 

to reduce the Bellman error, which drives the neural network’s Q -value estimations toward the true optimal action -value function, 

Q* . Once convergence is achieved, executing a greedy policy with r espect to these optimized Q -values naturally yields the optimal 

policy, 𝜋 ∗ thereby satisfying the global maximization objective J(π) .

Fig. 4 shows the complete system workflow of RL -Ballast . Unlike traditional deterministic controllers, RL -Ballast operate s

through a fundamentally decoupled scheme comprising an online interaction phase and an offline optimization phase. In the offline 

optimization phase, the framework strictly exploits the off -policy nature of the DQN model . Rather than updating weights 

synchronously after every action step, a randomized minibatch of historical transitions is periodically sampled from the replay 

buffer . The weight network parameters θ are iteratively updated via backpropagation to minimiz e the temporal difference (TD) 

against a periodically updated target network ( θ−). Such decoupling stabilizes the learning convergence against the high variance 

of hydrodynamic interactions, while effectively isolating the intensive model optimization workload from real -time operational 

constraints .

Completely decoupled from this background learning process, the online interaction phase governs real -time execution . The 

system first perceives the environment by capturing the current hydrodynamic observation to construct the state vector st. Then ,

the DQN agent evaluate s Q-values exclusively for the topologically valid flow paths pre -calcul ated via DFS . To balance 

environmental exploration with exploitative routing, an ε-greedy policy dictates the selected action at which is then translated into 

Figure 4. The complete workflow of  RL -Ballast  based on DQN -based agent  during the training phase and inference phase . .physical valve actuations . As the simulator executes this configuration, the environment transitions to a subsequent state st+1 and 

generates an immediate reward rt governed by the multi -objective hydraulic criteria . This complete interaction is then compressed 

into a transition tuple ( st, a t, r t, s t+1 ) and securely appended to the Experience Replay buffer . As a result, the framework in a sense 

executes an implicit fault diagnosis: if the emitted reward matches the exact stagnation penalty Pclog , the diagnostic module (shown 

in Fig.4 the composed of Failed -Action Memory and Scoring Blockage Suspicion) immediately flags the executed path to update 

the blockage suspicion scores . Advantageously, this diagnostic routine operates as an independent branch, entirely bypassing the 

neural network's gradient flow to preserve real -time computational efficiency .

B. Performance -Based Blockage Curriculum Training 

Training a reinforcement learning agent directly under highly complex blockage conditions may lead to unstable learning, 

excessive exploration failures, and slow convergence. To ad dress this issue, this study adopts a performance -based blockage 

curriculum training strategy (Bengio et al., 2009; Portelas et al., 2020) . Instead of exposing the agent to the maximum number of 

blockage components from the beginning, the training environment gradually increases the blockage difficulty according to the 

recent learning performance of the agent. In our implementation, we adopt a straightforward approach to achieve performance -

based curriculum learning. If the moving success rate exceeds a predefined threshold and the standard deviation is lower than a 

predefined threshold, the number of blocked co mponents is increased. At each training episode, a set of blocked components is 

randomly sampled from the candidate valves or pipe segments. The number of blocked components is controlled by the current 

blockage level. During the early training stage, the blockage level is kept low so that the agent can first learn basic feasible path 

selection and water -transfer behavior. After the agent maintains a high task success rate over a fixed evaluation window, the 

blockage level is increased by one until the pred efined maximum blockage level is reached. 

C. Failure History -Based Blockage Candidate Scoring 

Although the RL agent can learn to avoid ineffective transfer paths, operators still require interpretable diagnostic informa tion to 

understand why a selected pat h fails. To address this need, this study proposes a failure history -based blockage candidate scoring 

method. Instead of attempting to directly localize the blockage from dense pressure or flow measurements, the proposed method 

uses the accumulated failed transfer paths to rank candidate valves or pipe segments that are repeatedly associated with no -flow 

outcomes. The diagnostic computation is lightweight because it relies on frequency counting over the components contained in 

failed paths rather than high -fidelity fluid dynamics simulation or additional neural -network inference. When a selected transfer 

path produces no measurable tank -level increase and receives the no -flow penalty, the components along that path are recorded as 

suspicious candidates. Comp onents that appear more frequently in failed paths receive higher blockage suspicion scores. Therefore, 

the diagnostic module provides a ranked list of likely blockage candidates that can support operator inspection and maintenance 

prioritization under lim ited sensing conditions. This scoring process operates independently from the DQN weight -update process. 

As a result, the failure history -based diagnostic module can provide interpretable blockage evidence without interfering with the 

RL agent’s policy opt imization or online action selection. The resulting output should be interpreted as a relative suspicion ranking 

rather than an exact blockage localization result. 

D. Dy namic Action Masking for Inference Deadlock Avoidance via Negative Episodic Memory 

During the deterministic inference phase (where the exploration rate ϵ = 0), DRL agents are highly susceptible to infinite loops, or 

inference deadlocks, when encountering unmodeled topological blockages. This vulnerability st ems from the state aliasing under 

partial observability : if a selected flow path is obstructed, the macroscopic physical state (i.e., tank levels) remains unchanged 

(st+1 =s t). Without the stochasticity of exploration, the static Q -network repeatedly evalua tes the same failing action as optimal, 

fundamentally trapping the control loop. To overcome this critical limitation, we draw theoretical inspiration from the paradigm 

of Model -Free Episodic Control (MFEC) introduced by Blundell et al. (2016 ). While tradi tional MFEC accelerates learning by 

caching high -reward experiences for one -shot adaptation, we invert this principle to establish a Negative Episodic Memory 

mechanism via dynamic action masking. Specifically, when an executed action 𝑎 𝑡 triggers the definitive stagnation penalty (Pclog ),

the control architecture instantaneously caches this critical failure and prunes 𝑎 𝑡 from the valid action space 𝐴 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 . Consequently, 

in the subsequent decision step, the agent is forced to selec t the topologically feasible action with the next highest Q -value. This 

algorithmic intervention functions as an instantaneous episodic constraint, seamlessly breaking state -aliasing deadlocks. Ultimately, 

it ensures continuous, fail -safe ballast operation s without incurring the computational overhead of complex state -space 

augmentation, rendering it highly viable for real -time shipboard edge computing. The complete inference procedure is summarized 

in Algorithm 3. At each decision step, the trained DQN fir st evaluates the remaining candidate actions after excluding the actions 

stored in the failed -action memory. If the selected action leads to a no -flow response, the action is added to the failed -action 

memory and the components along the failed path are co unted for blockage candidate scoring. This procedure allows the agent to 

reroute within the same episode while simultaneously accumulating diagnostic evidence for ranking suspicious blockage 

candidates. The blockage candidate scoring equation is given as f ollows: 

𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 (𝑐 ) = ∑ 1(𝑐 ∈ 𝑝 𝑖 ),

> 𝑝 𝑖 ∈𝐹

(5)

where F denotes as the union of failed paths, c denotes as valve or pipe segment candidate. V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

This section systematically evaluates the effectiveness of RL -Ballast through a series of simulation experiments. All experiments 

were conducted using the TensorFlow framework on a workstation equipped with an Intel Core i9 -9900K CPU and an NVIDIA 

RTX 2080 GPU. The software environment included CUDA 10.0, cuDNN v7.6.5, and Python 3.6.9. 

A. Experiment Setup 

RL -Ballast was evaluated in a simulated ballast -water environment comprising 6 tanks, 12 valves, 2 pumps, and 54 feasible transfer 

paths generated from t he graph. Unless otherwise stated, i n both training and evaluation, the number of target tanks was set to 

three, corresponding to half of the six ballast tanks. This setting provides a representative transfer task while avoiding ov erly trivial 

single -tank filling cases. Fig. 5 shows a simulated scenario having the ballast -water tanks and piping routes, as well as the selected 

blockage candidates, including SW_708V, SW_709V, BW_02, BW_03, BW_04, and BW_05. Based on engineering knowledge 

of the ballast piping layout, several safety -critical components in Fig. 5 are excluded from the blockage -candidate set. This does 

not imply that these components cannot fail, but rather that such failures would represent severe system -level faults requiring 

inspection or main tenance instead of online rerouting. Since two simultaneous blockages would disable one -third of the six 

predefined blockage candidates, such a condition is treated as severe degradation beyond ordinary rerouting. Therefore, the 

maximum number of simultane ous blockages is limited to one as a controlled preliminary setting, while more complex multi -

blockage scenarios are reserved for future work. Unknown blockage scenarios were simulated by disabling selected valves or pi pe 

segments during evaluation. Evalua tion metrics include task success rate, average steps, average reward per episode, repeated 

failed actions, and blockage -candidate ranking hits. The experiments were designed to answer the following questions: (1) Can a 

DQN -based agent complete ballast tra nsfer under normal conditions? (2) Can the agent reroute water transfer under unknown 

blockage conditions? (3) Is a DQN -based agent faster than rule -based algorithms? (4) Does dynamic action masking reduce 

repeated ineffective actions? (5) Can failed trans fer histories identify likely blockage candidates? 

Table 1 lists the hyperparameters for training RL -Ballast . The maximum number of decision steps in each episode was set to 

200. If the agent completed the target ballast transfer task before reaching this limit, the episode was regarded as successful. 

Otherwise, the episode was terminated when the maximum step limit was reached. The agent was trained for 1 50,000 episodes to 

allow sufficient interaction with different routing and blockage configurations. The replay buffer size was set to 100,000 transitions, 

and a mini -batch size of 32 was used for each training update. The learning rate was set to 0.0001, and the discount factor γ was 

set to 0.98, allowing the agent to consider both immediate transfer progre ss and long -term task completion. The target network 

was updated every 3,000 training steps to stabilize Q -value estimation. An ε-greedy exploration strategy was used during training. 

The initial exploration rate was set to 0.9 to encourage broad exploration of feasible transfer paths at the beginning of tra ining. The 

exploration rate was gradually reduced to 0.01, allowing the agen t to shift from exploration to exploitation as training progressed. 

During inference, ε was set to 0 so that the trained policy selected actions deterministically according to the learned Q -values and 

Algorithm 3: Pseudocode of Inference with Failed -Action Memory and Dynamic Action Masking 

Input: Trained DQN Q (s, a; θ) , action set A, maximum steps T

Initialize failed -action memory 𝑀 = ∅

Initialize component failure counter C(v) = 0 for all components 

Reset environment and obtain initial state s0

for t = 1 to T do 

Select action 𝑎 𝑡 = 𝑎𝑟𝑔 max  

> 𝑎 ∈𝐴 \𝑀

𝑄 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑎 ; 𝜃 )

Execute action at

Observe tank -level response 

if no -flow condition is detected then 

Add at to failed -action memory 𝑀 

for each component v in path (at) do 

C(v) = C(v)+1 

end for 

end if 

Update state st+1 

if target tanks are filled then 

break 

end if 

end for 

Compute blockage suspicion score for each component 

Return selected action history and ranked blockage candidates the applied action -masking rules. This setting ensures that the evaluation results reflect the learned routing policy rather than 

random exploratory behavior. 

Table 1 Hyperparameters for training RL -Ballast 

Parameter  Value  Parameter  Value 

Number of ballast tanks  6 Learning rate  0.0001 

Number of valves  12 Discount factor 𝛾  0.98 

Number of feasible actions  54 Initial exploration rate 𝜖  0.9 

Maximum steps per episode  200  Final exploration rate 𝜖  0.01 

Training episodes  150000  Inference exploration rate 𝜖  0

Replay buffer size  100000  Target network update interval  3000 

Batch size  32 Frame -stacking length  4

B. Training Convergence Analysis 

To evaluate whether the proposed DQN -based agent can learn an effective ballast -water path -selection policy, the training 

convergence behavior was analyzed using episode total reward, average reward, task success rate, and average steps. The agent 

was trained with different random seeds, and the average results were reported. Among these metrics, task success rate, avera ge 

reward, and average steps were used as the primary indicators to examine both learning stability and ba llast -transfer performance. 

Fig. 6(a) shows the task success rate during training. The success rate declined between 10,000 and 20,000 episodes due to th e

performance -based curriculum learning strategy. When the number of blockages increased from 0 to 1, t he agent needed to explore 

a new routing policy. However, the success rate quickly recovered to nearly 1, indicating that the DQN -based agent learned an 

effective policy under the no -blockage scenario and could adapt to blockage conditions. 

The reward func tion defined in Eq. (1) significantly influences the learning behavior of the RL agent. In this study, the reward 

is designed to distinguish successful ballast transfer from ineffective transfer attempts without hard -coding a specific routing 

solution. To evaluate the robustness of the reward design, two reward -parameter settings are evaluated to examine whether Eq. (1) 

Figure 5.  A s imulat ed scenario of  ballast water tank s and piping route s, where possible blockage points are 

SW_708V, SW_709V, BW_02, BW_03, BW_04 and BW_05. can consistently converge under different coefficient settings. As mentioned earlier, the first setting is the default (Rsucc , Pclog ,

 , ,

) = (10, -0.5, 0.01, 0.07, 0.05). The second setting (Rsucc , Pclog ,

 ,

 ,

) = (30, -1, 0.015, 0.08, 0.05) 

.

As shown in Fig. 6(b), the total reward per episode is presented using Min –Max -normalized moving -average curves. For 

visualization, each moving -average reward curve is independently normalized to [0, 1] as Eq. (6). 

𝑅 ̅ 𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 (𝑒 ) = 𝑅 ̅ (𝑒 )−min        

> 𝑒 𝑅 ̅(𝑒 )
> max
> 𝑒 𝑅 ̅(𝑒 )−min
> 𝑒 𝑅 ̅(𝑒 )

, (6)

where 𝑅 ̅ (𝑒 ) denotes the moving -average reward at the e-th episode . This normalization is useful in examining convergence trends 

across different reward -parameter settings. In the early training stage, the normalized reward remains relatively low because the 

agent frequently selects inefficient or ineffective transfer paths. As training progresses, the moving -ave rage reward gradually 

increases, indicating that the agent learns to select actions that lead to successful tank -level increases while avoiding repeated 

ineffective routes. Despite that the two settings use different in coefficient values, they all comply with the same constraints defined 

in Eq. (1). As a result, the variations in coefficient values only affect the convergence speed and reward magnitude, the lea rning 

behaviors of these two settings largely follow the same pattern. 

C. Baseline Routing withou t Blockage 

The first experiment evaluates the basic path -planning capability of the trained agents under normal operating conditions. In this 

setting, all valves, pumps, and pipe segments are functional, and no blockage is introduced into the ballast pipin g network. The 

purpose is to verify whether DQN and DDQN can learn feasible ballast -transfer sequences and complete the target tank -level task 

before evaluating more challenging blockage scenarios. For comparison, a deterministic Dijkstra shortest -path str ategy (Dijkstra, 

1959) was implemented as the rule -based baseline. Since the ballast -water system is modeled as a directed graph, this baseline 

provides a reproducible benchmark for selecting minimum -cost transfer paths based on fixed edge weights. However , it cannot 

learn from past outcomes or adapt its routing policy through interaction. Success rate, average steps, and average reward are used 

as evaluation metrics. Success rate measures task completion, average steps evaluate decision efficiency, and ave rage reward 

reflects the learned policy quality of the RL agents. Since the rule -based baseline does not optimize a learned reward function, its 

average reward is reported as N/A. As shown in Table 2, all three methods achieve a 100% success rate under the no -blockage 

condition. However, DQN and DDQN complete the task in 41 and 38 average steps, respectively, compared with 60 steps for the 

rule -based baseline. DDQN also achieves a higher average reward than DQN, increasing from 22.6 to 24.9. These results i ndicate 

that the graph -based action representation enables the RL agents to learn valid and efficient path -selection policies under nominal 

ballast operating conditions. 

Table 2 Baseline Routing Performance without Blockage     

> Method Success Rate (%) Avg. Steps Avg. Reward

DQN  100%  41  22.6 

DDQN  100%  38 24.9 

Rule -based  100%  60 N/A 

D. Comparison with Rule -Based Algorithms 

The second experiment evaluates whether the trained agents can complete the water -transfer task under unknown single -blockage 

scenarios and compares their performance with a deterministic rule -based baseline. The evaluation metrics include success rate, 

Figure 6. (a) the success rate per episode ; (b) the Min -Max normalized average reward per episode of two  different 

parametric settings. av erage steps, average reward, and wasted action rate. Success rate, average steps, and average reward are defined in the same 

manner as in the previous experiment, while the wasted action rate measures the proportion of ineffective actions. As shown in 

Tabl e 3, all methods achieve a 100% success rate under single -blockage conditions. However, DQN and DDQN require fewer 

average steps than the rule -based baseline, completing the task in 42.167 and 41.5 steps, respectively, compared with 61 steps for 

the rule -based method. This indicates that the learned policies improve routing efficiency rather than merely finding feasible paths. 

Compared with DQN, DDQN further reduces the average steps from 42.167 to 41.5, increases the average reward from 19.493 to 

24.1, and lowers the wasted action rate from 9.48% to 6.02%. Although the rule -based baseline has a lower wasted action rate of 

1.64%, it requires more decision steps and cannot learn action preferences from previous interactions. These results show tha t

DDQN provi des a more efficient learned routing policy under unknown blockage conditions. 

Table 3 Baseline Performance with Single -Blockage 

Method  Success Rate (%)  Avg. Steps  Avg. Reward  Wasted Action Rate (%) 

DQN  100%  42.167  19.493  9.48% 

DDQN  100%  41.5  24.1  6.02% 

Rule -based  100%  61  N/A  1.64% 

E. Dynamic Rerouting under Unmodeled Blockages 

Next, we evaluate the agent’s ability to adapt to unknown blockage conditions. Here , DDQN is used because it achieved better 

overall performance. Selected valves or pipe segments were blocked without revealing their locations to the agent . The agent could 

only infer blockage from tank -level responses after each action. The number of targ et tanks was fixed at three, and the target tanks 

were randomly selected in each trial. Each blockage scenario was tested 1,000 times, and the average metrics were reported. I n

addition to the previously defined metrics, average failed actions are used to measure how many ineffective transfer attempts occur 

before the agent identifies and avoids obstructed routes. As shown in Table 4, the DDQN agent maintains a 100% success rate 

across all six single -blockage scenarios. The average number of failed actions is 2.5, the average number of steps is 41.5, and the 

average reward is 0.5815. Among the tested blockage components, BW_02 results in the highest number of failed actions, with 6 

failed actions, 43 average steps, and an average reward of 0.5279. In contras t, SW_708V and BW_04 require only 1 failed action 

and 40 average steps, achieving the highest average reward of 0.6175. These results indicate that RL -Ballast can infer blockage 

effects from tank -level responses and autonomously reroute ballast -water trans fer under unknown blockage conditions. 

Table 4 Rerouting Performance under Unknown Blockage 

Blockage Component  Success Rate (%)  Avg. Failed Actions  Avg. Steps  Avg. Reward 

SW_708V  100%  1 40 0.6175 

SW_709V  100%  2 42 0.5738 

BW_02  100%  6 43 0.5279 

BW_03  100%  3 42 0.5786 

BW_04  100%  1 40 0.6175 

BW_05  100%  2 42 0.5738 

Average  100%  2.5  41.5  0.5815 

F. Ablation Study of Dynamic Action Masking 

To evaluate the contribution of dynamic action masking, an ablation study was conducted by comparing four DDQ N methods : no 

masking, tank -completion masking, failed -action masking, and the proposed combined masking strategy. The purpose is to 

determine whether excluding previously failed actions improves fault -aware inference under unknown blockage conditions. In this 

experiment, the number of target tanks was kept at the default setting, while both target tanks and blockage points were rand omly 

selected. Each method was tested under every blockage candidate, and the average results are reported in Table 5. In a ddition to 

the previously defined metrics, repeated failed action counts measure how often the agent reselects ineffective actions, whil e

diagnostic feasibility qualitatively evaluates whether the resulting failure histories are useful for blockage -candida te diagnosis. 

Using only tank -completion masking results in a lower success rate of 83.33%, 27.33 repeated failed actions, 67.67 average steps, 

and a high wasted action rate of 42.11%, because the agent can still select paths containing blocked components. Using only failed -

action masking achieves a 100% success rate and zero repeated failed actions, but increases the average steps to 94.83 and th e

wasted action rate to 37.78%. In contrast, the proposed combined masking strategy achieves a 100% success rate , zero repeated 

failed actions, 41.5 average steps, and a wasted action rate of 3.61%, while maintaining high diagnostic feasibility. Althoug h

DDQN without masking achieves fewer average steps of 38.67 and a lower wasted action rate of 1.29%, its diagnosti c feasibility is only medium because the generated failure histories may be less interpretable. Overall, the combined masking strategy prov ides 

the best balance between task completion, routing efficiency, and physically interpretable diagnostic records. 

Table 5 Ablation Study of Dynamic Action Masking 

Method  Success Rate 

(%) 

Av erage Repeated Failed 

Action Co unts 

Avg. 

Steps 

Wasted Action 

Rate (%) 

Diagnostic 

Feasibility 

DD QN without masking  100 % 0 38. 67  1.29 % Medium 

DD QN + tank -

completion mask  83.33 % 27.33  67.67  42.11%  Low 

DD QN + failed -action 

mask  100 % 0 94.83  37.78%  High 

Proposed method  100%  0 41.5  3.61%  High 

G. Blockage Candidate Ranking 

The final experiment evaluates whether failed transfer histories can provide useful diagnostic information. Here , the trained DDQN 

agent with the combined action masking strategy was used. Different blockage points were defined as different scenarios; for 

example, S1 simulates a blockage at SW_708V. For each scenario, the proposed scoring method ranks valves or pipe segments 

according to their accumulated failure counts. The diagnostic performance is evaluated using Top -k hits, where a prediction is a

hit if the true block age is one of the Top -k ranked candidates 

𝑇𝑜𝑝 − 𝑘 ℎ𝑖𝑡 = 𝑁 correct 

> (𝑘 )
> 𝑁 total

× 100% , (7)

where N(k) correct denotes the number of blockage scenarios in which the true blocked component is one of the top -(k) ranked 

candidates, and Ntotal denotes the total number of evaluated blockage scenarios. When multiple components obtain the same failure 

score, they are treated as a tied suspicious group, and the diagnostic result should be interpreted as a candidate ranking ra ther than 

a unique fault localization result. As sho wn in Table 6, the proposed failure history -based scoring method achieves a Top -3(h it ) rate 

of 100% across all evaluated blockage scenarios. The Top -1(h it ) rate is (4/6=66.7%), because the true blockage is ranked first in 

four out of six scenarios. For ser ially connected components, such as SW_708V/BW_04 and SW_709V/BW_05, the method can 

identify the correct suspicious blockage group but may not always distinguish the exact blocked component. This is because 

upstream and downstream blockages on the same tra nsfer branch can produce indistinguishable tank -level responses. To account 

for this ambiguity, we also report a tie -adjusted top -1 hit rate (Top -1(tie -hit )). When multiple components obtain the same highest 

suspicion score, they are treated as a tied susp icious group. If the true blockage is uniquely ranked first, the Top -1 credit is 1; if it 

is included in a tied group (G), a fractional credit of (1/|G|) is assigned; otherwise, the credit is 0. Under this definitio n, the tie -

adjusted Top -1(h it ) rate is 83 .3%, because the two serially connected blockage cases receive a fractional credit of 0.5 instead of 0. 

Therefore, the diagnostic output should be interpreted as a ranked suspicious region or candidate group rather than exact 

component -level localization i n all cases. 

Table 6 Blockage Candidate Ranking Performance 

Scenario  True Blockage  Top -1(hit)  Top -1 (tie-hit ) Top -3(hit)  Rank of True Blockage 

S1 SW_708V  1.0  1.0  1.0  1

S2 SW_709V  1.0  1.0  1.0  1

S3 BW_02  1.0  1.0  1.0  1

S4 BW_03  1.0  1.0  1.0  1

S5 BW_04  0 0.5 1.0  2

S6 BW_05  0 0.5 1.0  2

Average  0. 67  0.833  1.0  N/A VI . DISCUSSION S

From a practical perspective, RL -Ballast provides a decision -support mechanism for fault -aware ballast -water operation under 

limited sensing conditions. Under the broader Shipping 4.0 paradigm, intelligent onboard systems are expected to improve not 

only navigation autonomy but also the reliability and efficiency of internal shipboard operations. This direction is also con sistent 

with the broad er sustainability motivation of SDG 13 and climate -change mitigation, where digitalization and AI -enabled decision 

support can contribute to safer, more efficient, and less wasteful maritime operations. In this context, RL -Ballast focuses on the 

internal b allast -water transfer process by reducing repeated ineffective route selection and supporting blockage -aware operational 

decisions. The modular design of RL -Ballast provides implementation flexibility. Although DQN and DDQN are adopted in this 

study as rep resentative value -based agents, the framework itself is not restricted to a specific reinforcement learning algorithm. 

The environment module, graph -based action generator, state representation, episodic failure memory, action masking mechanism, 

and blocka ge candidate scoring module can be coupled with alternative RL architectures when the control objective or action space 

changes. In the present formulation, the DQN/DDQN is suitable because the graph -based representation converts the raw valve -

combination problem into a finite set of discrete transfer -path actions. 

The primary limitation of the current framework lies in the spatial resolution of blockage localization. Because the diagnostic 

module relies mainly on macroscopic tank -level responses and failed path histories, it may not always distinguish the exact blocked 

component when multiple valves or pipe segments are serially connected and repeatedly appear in the same failed transfer path s. 

In such cases, the proposed method can identify a suspicious co mponent group or pipe region, but the exact component -level 

blockage location may still require additional sensing, inspection, or active diagnostic testing. Therefore, the diagnostic o utput 

should be interpreted as a relative blockage suspicion ranking ra ther than an exact localization result or calibrated fault probability. 

Future work will exploit the algorithmic flexibility of RL -Ballast to extend the framework toward more realistic and complex 

ballast -control scenarios. Continuous -action reinforcement learning may be explored for precise valve throttling or variable pump -

speed regulation, while hierarchical or multi -agent reinforcement learning may be considered for larger ballast networks. Physics -

informed or constrained reinforcement learning may also be introduced to incorporate hydraulic feasibility, topological invariants, 

and operational safety constraints into the learning process. Finally, additional pressure, flow, vibration, or acoustic sens ing may 

be integrated with failed -action -based diagnos is to improve the localization accuracy for serially connected blockage candidates. 

VII. CONCLUSION 

This paper proposed RL -Ballast, a graph -based reinforcement learning framework for adaptive path planning and blockage 

candidate scoring in ship ballast -wat er systems. The study was motivated by the need for intelligent onboard internal systems under 

the Shipping 4.0 paradigm, where autonomous and reduced -crew vessels require reliable control of safety -critical shipboard 

operations. By modeling the ballast pi ping system as a topology -constrained graph, feasible water -transfer routes were generated 

and converted into discrete reinforcement learning actions. This design transforms the original valve -control problem into a feasible 

path -selection problem, reducin g invalid action combinations while preserving the physical constraints of the piping network. 

Based on this graph -generated action space, DQN and DDQN agents were trained to select ballast -water transfer paths using 

observable tank -level states and action -outcome histories. A performance -based blockage curriculum was introduced to improve 

training stability, while episode -level failed -action memory and dynamic action masking were used during inference to avoid 

repeated ineffective paths under unknown blockage conditions. In addition, failed transfer histories were reused as diagnostic 

evidence by accumulating failure counts over shared valves and pipe segments. The resulting diagnostic output provides a rank ed 

list of suspicious blockage candidates ra ther than a calibrated fault probability or exact component -level localization. 

Simulation results show that RL -Ballast can complete all evaluated unexpected single -blockage scenarios with a 100% 

success rate. Compared with the Dijkstra rule -based baseline , DDQN reduces the average number of decision steps from 61.0 to 

41.5, indicating improved routing efficiency under blockage conditions. The ablation study further shows that the proposed 

combined masking strategy achieves a 100% success rate, zero repeate d failed actions, 41.5 average steps, and a wasted action rate 

of 3.61%, providing a better balance between task completion, routing efficiency, and diagnostic interpretability. For blocka ge 

candidate scoring, the proposed failure history -based method achi eves a 100% top -3 hit rate, a 66.7% strict top -1 hit rate, and an 

83.3% tie -adjusted top -1 hit rate under serially indistinguishable blockage conditions. These results suggest that reinforcement 

learning can support not only adaptive ballast -water reroutin g but also maintenance -oriented diagnostic assistance under limited 

sensing conditions. Since the present study is based on a simulated single -blockage setting, future work will extend the framework 

toward higher -fidelity hydraulic simulation, multi -blocka ge scenarios, sensor -noise modeling, and hardware -in -the -loop validation. CRediT Author Statement 

Ming -Kuan Lin: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Writing –

original draft. Yi -Chung Lai: Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Ming -Hsin Chiang: 

Methodology, Software, Investigation. Jung -Hua Wang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Project administration, 

Writing – review & editing. Tsung -Wei Pan: Writing – review & editing. 

Data Availability 

Simulation data and pertaining source code are available upon the acceptance of the paper and reasonable request. 

REFERENCE 

Ai, Z., Cao, H., Wang, M., Yang, K., 2024. Ship Ballast Water System Fault Diagnosis Method Based on Multi -Feature Fusion 

Graph Convolution. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2755 , 012028. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742 -6596/2755/1/012028 

Bengio, Y., Louradour, J., Collobert, R., Weston, J., 2009. Curriculum learning, in: Proceedings of the 26th Annual International 

Conference on Machine Learning , ICML ’09. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 41 –48. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/1553374.1553380 

Blundell, C., Uria, B., Pritzel, A., Li, Y., Ru derman, A., Leibo, J.Z., Rae, J., Wierstra, D., Hassabis, D., 2016. Model -Free Episodic 

Control. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1606.04460 

Dijkstra, E. W. (1959). A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische Mathematik, 1, 269 –271. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01386390 

Ferreno -Gonzalez, S., Diaz -Casas, V., Miguez -Gonzalez, M., San -Gabino, C.G., 2025. Detection of Pipe Ruptures in Shipboard 

Firefighting Systems Using Machine Learning and Deep Learning Techniques. Appl. Sci. 15 , 1181. htt ps://doi.org/10.3390/ 

app15031181 

Geng, Y., Liu, E., Wang, R., Liu, Y., 2020. Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Dynamic Route Planning for Minimizing Travel 

Time. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2011.01771 

Hasselt, H. van, Guez, A., Silver, D., 2016. Deep R einforcement Learning with Double Q -Learning. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 

30 . https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v30i1.10295 

Hu, C., Cai, J., Zeng, D., Yan, X., Gong, W., Wang, L., 2020. Deep reinforcement learning based valve scheduling for pollutio n

isolat ion in water distribution network. Math. Biosci. Eng. 17 , 105 –121. https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2020006 

Kalashnikov, D., Irpan, A., Pastor, P., Ibarz, J., Herzog, A., Jang, E., Quillen, D., Holly, E., Kalakrishnan, M., Vanhoucke, V., and 

Levine, S., “Scalab le Deep Reinforcement Learning for Vision -Based Robotic Manipulation,” Proceedings of the 2nd 

Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR , vol. 87, pp. 651 –673, 2018. 

Kufoalor, D.K.M., Wilthil, E., Hagen, I.B., Brekke, E.F., Johansen, T.A., 2019. Autonomous COLREGs -Compliant Decision 

Making using Maritime Radar Tracking and Model Predictive Control, in: 2019 18th European Control Conference (ECC) .

pp. 2536 –2542. https://doi.org/10.23919/ECC.2019.8796273 

Li, Y., Wu, Defeng, You, Z., Chen, G., Wu, Dongjie, 2025. Deep reinforcement learning for collision avoidance in unmanned 

surface vehicles: State -of -the -art. Appl. Ocean Res. 164 , 104778. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apor.2025.104778 

Portelas, R., Colas, C., Weng, L., Hofmann, K., Oudeyer, P. -Y., 2020. Automatic Curriculum Learning For Deep RL: A Short 

Survey [WWW Document]. arXiv.org. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.04664v2 (accessed 5.30.26). 

Sarhadi, P., Naeem, W., Athanasopoulos, N., 2022. A survey of recent machine learning solutions for ship collision avoidan ce and 

mission planning: IFAC Conference on Control Applications in Marine Systems , Robotics and Vehicles. Proc. 14th IFAC 

Conf . Control Appl. Mar. Syst. Robot. Veh. CAMS 2022 , IFAC -PapersOnLine 257 –268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol. 

2022.10.440 

Sulliv an, B.P., Arias Nava, E., Desai, S., Sole, J., Rossi, M., Ramundo, L., Terzi, S., 2021. Defining Maritime 4.0: Reconciling 

principles, elements and characteristics to support maritime vessel digitalisation. IET Collab. Intell. Manuf. 3 , 23 –36. 

https://doi. org/10.1049/cim2.12012 

Sullivan, B.P., Desai, S., Sole, J., Rossi, M., Ramundo, L., Terzi, S., 2020. Maritime 4.0 – Opportunities in Digitalization and 

Advanced Manufacturing for Vessel Development. Procedia Manuf. 42 , 246 –253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pr omfg. 

2020.02.078 

Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G., 2018. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction , 2nd ed, Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning 

series. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. 

Terven, J., 2025. Deep Reinforcement Learning: A Chronological Overview and Methods. AI 6 , 46. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 

ai6030046 

Velasco -Gallego, C., Lazakis, I., Cubo -Mateo, N., 2024. Development of a Hierarchical Clustering Method for Anomaly 

Identification and Labelling of Marine Machinery Data. J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 12 , 1792. https://doi.org/10.3390/jmse12101792 

Wang, W., Cao, X., Gonzalez -Garcia, A., Yin, L., Hagemann, N., Qiao, Y., Ratti, C., Rus, D., 2023. Deep Reinforcement Learning 

Based Tracking Control of an Autonomous Surface Vessel in Natur al Waters. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.08100