Title: CBF-based Driving Assistance for Traffic Flow Stabilization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11883v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:00:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# CBF-based Driving Assistance for Traffic Flow Stabilization ⋆

H. Irie ∗M. Inoue ∗B. Okita ∗

A. Yamaguchi ∗∗ T. Taki ∗∗ T. Hatano ∗∗ ∗ Keio University, Kanagawa, Japan (e-mail: irihaya0913@keio.jp, minoue.z6@keio.jp, banri.okita@keio.jp).  

> ∗∗

Mazda Motor Corporation, Hiroshima, Japan (e-mail: yamaguchi.akira@mazda.co.jp, taki.t@mazda.co.jp, hatano.taka@mazda.co.jp) 

Abstract: This manuscript addresses a hierarchical control system designed to suppress traffic congestion. The lower-layered controllers, implemented in each controlled vehicle, monitor microscopic vehicle behaviors and assist human drivers to ensure sufficient spacing for following vehicles. This spacing logic is designed based on the Control Barrier Function. Meanwhile, the upper-layered controller monitors the macroscopic traffic flow and activates the necessary lower-layered controllers, using a data-driven approach for the activation logic design. Furthermore, the effectiveness of the proposed control system is evaluated in a traffic flow simulation environment constructed using real-world traffic data. 

Keywords: Congestion Mitigation, Hierarchical Control, Driving Assistance System, Safety critical control, Control Barrier Function, Time to Collision. 1. INTRODUCTION In recent years, automotive technologies have significantly advanced, and research and development have mainly aimed at improving performance indices of individual ve-hicles, such as fuel efficiency, ride comfort, and safety (see e.g., the work by Paden et al. (2016)). While these im-proved driving behaviors tend to prioritize individual ve-hicle performance, they often compromise the performance of surrounding vehicles and overall macroscopic traffic stability. (see e.g., the works by Swaroop and Hedrick (1995); Ploeg et al. (2014); Sugiyama et al. (2008)). From this perspective, in addition to conventional performance indices, cooperative driving factors must be taken into account to suppress traffic congestion by using information on surrounding vehicles and macroscopic traffic conditions (see e.g., the works by Li et al. (2020); Talebpour and Mah-massani (2016)). In particular, appropriate velocity control according to macroscopic traffic conditions is expected to suppress velocity fluctuations of following vehicles and contribute to traffic flow stabilization. Based on this background, many studies have focused on vehicle control for traffic flow stabilization. Zhao et al. (2023); Li et al. (2025) proposed a safety filter based on Control Barrier Function (CBF) (see e.g., the work by Ames et al. (2019)), which modifies the control input generated by a velocity controller for traffic flow stabi-lization. This approach achieves both traffic flow stabi-lization and vehicle safety. In addition, as a study on cooperative vehicle control using macroscopic traffic con-ditions, Ferrara et al. (2022); Fan et al. (2025) proposed a hierarchical control system. The upper-layered controller  

> ⋆This work is supported by Mazda Motor Corporation.

monitors macroscopic traffic conditions such as traffic den-sity and generates control commands aimed at improving the overall efficiency of traffic flow. Meanwhile, the lower-layered controller regulates the microscopic behaviors of individual vehicles to ensure safety and traffic stability. The proposed systems assume direct control of connected and automated vehicle platoons through vehicle-to-vehicle communication, enabling cooperative coordination among the vehicles in the platoon. This manuscript addresses the stabilization of traffic flow by controlling microscopic vehicle behaviors based on macroscopic traffic conditions. Specifically, rather than assuming fully autonomous driving, we design advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) tailored for human-driven vehicles. In ADAS, excessively frequent interven-tions may cause annoyance and discomfort to drivers, leading to reduced system acceptability (see e.g., the work by Paiva et al. (2021)). Therefore, unnecessary interven-tions should be suppressed while maintaining safety and traffic flow stabilization. We propose a hierarchical con-trol system to suppress traffic congestion while reducing unnecessary interventions. A conceptual diagram of the proposed system is shown in Fig. 1. Lower-layered con-trollers, implemented in each controlled vehicle, monitor microscopic vehicle behaviors and intervene in driver con-trol actions based on CBF to ensure sufficient spacing for following vehicles. The upper-layered controller monitors macroscopic traffic flow and generates an activation signal based on an intervention logic designed through a data-driven approach. The activation signal is then used to activate the necessary lower-layered controllers. 

> arXiv:2606.11883v1 [eess.SY] 10 Jun 2026

Fig. 1. Hierarchical control system for traffic flow stabiliz-tion 2. HIERARCHICAL CONTROL SYSTEM 

2.1 Overview 

This manuscript addresses a control problem in a traffic scenario where multiple vehicles travel in a platoon on a single-lane road, as shown in Fig. 1. Our objective is to suppress traffic congestion in the pla-toon. Traffic congestion is generated and spreads through the accumulation of microscopic car-following behaviors, in which each vehicle adjusts its motion according to the inter-vehicle distance and relative velocity with respect to the preceding vehicle (see e.g., the works by Swaroop and Hedrick (1995); Ploeg et al. (2014); Sugiyama et al. (2008)). Therefore, the solution to traffic congestion lies in the appropriate control of car-following behavior. However, applying control interventions to all vehicles in a real-world traffic system is impractical. Therefore, the proposed system selectively intervenes in only a relatively small number of controlled vehicles. In addition, exces-sively frequent interventions may increase driver burden and reduce system acceptability. Therefore, unnecessary interventions should be minimized. Accordingly, we aim to achieve traffic flow stabilization while suppressing unnecessary interventions as much as possible. To this end, we propose the hierarchical control system shown in Fig. 2. In the figure, the driver H

performs accelerator and brake operations, and generates the corresponding acceleration input uh based on the position and velocity of the preceding vehicle, xp and vp, as well as those of the controlled vehicle, x and v. In addition, the average inter-vehicle distance ¯d and average velocity ¯v of the following vehicle platoon are obtained and used by the upper-layered controller Ku. Based on the traffic state of the following vehicle platoon, the upper-layered controller Ku evaluates the influence of the controlled vehicles on traffic flow and generates an activation signal 

ϕ. Each element of ϕ indicates whether the corresponding lower-layered controller should be activated. The activated lower-layered controller Kl intervenes in the acceleration input uh and generates the modified acceleration input u

to suppress traffic congestion. Subsequently, the modified acceleration input u is applied to the vehicle P . In the following subsections, we present the models of the vehicle 

P and the driver H.

2.2 Vehicle Model P

The vehicle model P is described by the discrete-time ballistic model developed by Treiber and Kesting (2012). 

Fig. 2. Overall structure of the proposed hierarchical control system The longitudinal position x and velocity v of the vehicle are given by 

x(k + 1) = x(k) + ∆ t v (k) + 12 ∆t2u(k), (1) 

v(k + 1) = v(k) + ∆ t u (k), (2) where ∆ t denotes the sampling period. 

2.3 Driver Model H

The driver model H is described by the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) proposed by Treiber et al. (2000). The IDM outputs the driver acceleration uh(k), which mimics the driver’s car-following behavior, based on the inter-vehicle distance d(k) = xp(k) − x(k) and the relative velocity ∆v(k) = v(k)−vp(k) with respect to the preceding vehicle. The acceleration uh is generated by the IDM as follows: 

uh(k) = uIDM 

"

1 −

 v(k)

vdes 

δ

−

 d∗(k)

d(k)

2#

, (3) where vdes denotes the desired velocity, uIDM denotes the maximum acceleration, and δ is the acceleration exponent of the IDM. In addition, d∗(k) denotes the desired inter-vehicle distance. In this manuscript, d∗(k) is determined by the current velocity and the relative velocity with respect to the preceding vehicle as follows: 

d∗(k) = d0 + T v (k) + v(k)∆ v(k)2√uIDM b , (4) where b denotes the desired deceleration, d0 denotes the jam distance, and T denotes the safe time headway. 3. HIERARCHICAL CONTROLLER DESIGN The proposed hierarchical control system is designed to achieve two primary objectives. The first objective is to suppress traffic congestion. Specifically, the proposed con-troller suppresses velocity fluctuations in traffic flow by regulating the acceleration and deceleration behaviors of the controlled vehicle so that unnecessary deceleration is not induced in the following vehicle platoon. The second objective is to reduce driver burden by suppressing un-necessary interventions. To achieve the second objective, the upper-layered controller selectively activates the lower-layered controllers according to the traffic state. As a result, interventions are applied only when they are nec-essary for traffic congestion suppression. 

3.1 Upper-layered Controller Ku

To simplify the notation, we focus on the case of a single controlled vehicle. Accordingly, the activation signal ϕ is treated as a scalar variable. Even in the case of multiple controlled vehicles, the following discussion applies by vectorizing ϕ.The upper-layered controller Ku evaluates whether veloc-ity fluctuations propagate through the following vehicle platoon and outputs ϕ. Specifically, ϕ is determined based on the average inter-vehicle distance ¯d and the average velocity ¯ v of the n following vehicles. The activation signal is given as follows: 

ϕ =

(1, g( ¯d, ¯v) > 0,

0, g( ¯d, ¯v) ≤ 0, (5) where ϕ = 1 indicates a request for intervention to activate the lower-layered controller Kl, whereas ϕ = 0 indicates no such request. In addition, g( ¯d, ¯v) is a function that evaluates whether the velocity reduction caused by deceleration of the preceding vehicle propagates to the following vehicle platoon. The function g( ¯d, ¯v) is obtained through a data-driven approach. Specifically, it is obtained in the simulation preparation described in subsection 4.2. Accordingly, the upper-layered controller determines the activation signal ϕ based on the state of traffic flow. The lower-layered controller is activated when ϕ = 1. 

3.2 Lower-layered Controller Kl

The lower-layered controller Kl intervenes in driver control actions to suppress traffic congestion. Based on the driver acceleration input uh(k) and the states of the preceding and following vehicles, the lower-layered controller determines the intervention amount ua(k). The total acceleration input u(k) is then generated as 

u(k) = uh(k) + ua(k). (6) As studied by Saifuzzaman and Zheng (2014), following vehicles decelerate when they perceive a risk of collision based on the inter-vehicle distance and relative velocity with respect to the preceding vehicle. In this manuscript, the propagation of a deceleration wave to following vehicles is determined based on a threshold of Time-to-Collision (TTC), which was introduced by Hayward (1972). TTC is defined as follows: TTC( k) = 



d(k)∆v(k) , ∆v(k) > 0,

∞, ∆v(k) ≤ 0,

(7) where ∆ v(k) > 0 represents the situation in which the following vehicle is approaching the preceding vehicle. In this case, TTC decreases monotonically with respect to the relative velocity ∆ v(k) and increases with respect to the inter-vehicle distance d(k). TTC represents the remaining time until a collision occurs, assuming the current velocities remain constant. Therefore, a smaller TTC indicates a higher risk of collision and implicitly requires a larger braking effort from the following vehicle to ensure safety. Each controlled vehicle must maintain two types of TTC: one with respect to the preceding vehicle, denoted by Tp,to ensure its own safety, and another with respect to the following vehicle, denoted by Tf , to suppress the propaga-tion of velocity reductions. To maintain sufficient TTC margins for both, we use the Control Barrier Function (CBF) framework. The barrier functions based on Tp and 

Tf are defined as follows: 

hp(k) := dp(k) − Tp∆vp(k), (8) 

hf (k) := df (k) − Tf ∆vf (k), (9) where hp(k) > 0 indicates that TTC with respect to the preceding vehicle is maintained above Tp, thereby ensuring safety. Similarly, hf (k) > 0 indicates that TTC with respect to the following vehicle is maintained above Tf ,thereby ensuring a sufficient temporal margin. Using these barrier functions, we formulate the follow-ing optimization problem to determine the intervention amount ua that suppresses velocity reduction of following vehicles while ensuring safety with respect to the preceding vehicle. 

Problem 1. 

max 

> ua(k), T b

Tb (10) s.t. (1) , (2) , (6) , (8) , (9) ,hp(k + 1) − hp(k)∆t ≥ − αh p(k), (11) 

hf (k + 1) − hf (k)∆t ≥ − αh f (k), (12) 

dp(k) ≥ dmin , (13) 

− umax ≤ u(k) ≤ umax , (14) 

vmin ≤ v(k) ≤ vmax . (15) Through this optimization, the intervention amount ua(k)is obtained to maintain safety with respect to the preced-ing vehicle while maximizing the temporal margin with respect to the following vehicle. ua(k) is added to the driver acceleration uh(k) and applied to the vehicle as the final acceleration input. 4. EXPERIMENT ON TRAFFIC SIMULATOR In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the pro-posed hierarchical control system using a traffic simulator developed and calibrated with real-world data. In par-ticular, we demonstrate that the upper-layered controller can macroscopically suppress traffic congestion without unnecessary interventions in human driving. 

4.1 Preparation 1: Simulator Development 

A traffic simulator is constructed using real-world traffic data. The data used here are Zen Traffic Data (ZTD) provided by Hanshin Expressway Co., Ltd. (2018). ZTD is a large-scale, high-resolution trajectory dataset obtained using image sensing technology and contains continuous trajectory information for almost all vehicles. ZTD ob-tained on the Hanshin Expressway Route 13 Higashi-Osaka Line (toward Nara), near Morinomiya Junction (1.8–4.6 kp), are used. As shown in Fig. 3, highly accurate vehicle trajectory data with a temporal resolution of 0 .1 s are available. In addition, this manuscript uses one hour of traffic data, denoted as “L003 F001,” collected from 10:00 to 11:00. The simulation environment is built using the real-world data, and vehicle behavior is reproduced via equation (3). Fig. 3. Hanshin Expressway Route 13 Higashi-Osaka Line near Morinomiya Junction (1.8–4.6 kp) Reference:https://zen-traffic-data.net/english/outline/dataprovision.html?area=morinomiya Table 1. IDM parameters                    

> Parameter Passenger car Truck
> vdes [m/s] 27.0 20.6
> T[s] 1.19 1.76
> d0[m] 0.85 1.11
> uIDM [m/s 2]1.00 0.77
> b[m/s 2]2.26 1.71
> δ44

To accurately match real-world driving, three adjustments were made to the IDM. (1) Road Gradient: Because the road gradient changes throughout the target section, standard IDM accel-eration alone is insufficient. To account for this, the simulation incorporates gravity effects based on the road gradient angle θ and gravitational acceleration 

g:

uuse = u − g sin θ. (16) (2) Perception Delay: To mimic actual human reaction times, the model introduces a 0 .5 s perception delay. (3) Vehicle Types: Since passenger cars and trucks ex-hibit different car-following behaviors, separate IDM parameters are applied to each vehicle type. The IDM parameters were calibrated to ensure that the simulation accurately reproduces the real-world dataset. Taking the parameter values from Liu et al. (2016), the parameters were adjusted to the values shown in Table 1 to reproduce the observed traffic flow. 

4.2 Preparation 2: Controller Settings Settings of the Upper-layered Controller In the upper-layered controller, it is necessary to construct the function 

g( ¯d, ¯v), which determines whether a deceleration wave propagates through the following vehicle platoon when the preceding vehicle decelerates. A data-driven approach is adopted for the design of the function g( ¯d, ¯v). In particular, data collection is performed assuming that vehicles initially travel according to the IDM with uniform inter-vehicle spacing and uniform ve-locity. We then analyze the average inter-vehicle distance, average velocity, and whether the deceleration wave prop-agates, which indicates the likelihood of triggering traf-fic congestion. The function g( ¯d, ¯v) is subsequently con-structed from the determined threshold. The result is il-lustrated in Fig. 4. In the figure, the horizontal and vertical axes represent the average velocity ¯ v and the average inter-vehicle distance ¯d of the following vehicle platoon at the 

Fig. 4. Simulation results of deceleration wave propagation and the resulting intervention boundary Table 2. Parameters used in the lower-layered controller         

> Parameter Value ∆t0.1 s
> umax 5.0 m /s2
> dmin 2.0 m
> vmin 0.0 m /s
> vmax 39 .0 m /s
> α0.8
> Tf5.0 s

initial time, respectively. The red points indicate that the deceleration wave is propagated, whereas the blue points indicate that no propagation occurs. Function g( ¯d, ¯v) = 0 is constructed from the boundary between these two regions. By incorporating a safety margin, the following function was obtained: 

g( ¯d, ¯v) = 0 .04464 ¯ v2 − 0.1012 ¯ v + 12 .63 − ¯d. (17) In Fig. 4, the dashed line represents the fitted propagation boundary, whereas the solid line represents the boundary defined by g( ¯d, ¯v) = 0 after incorporating the safety margin. 

Settings of the Lower-layered Controller The parameters used in Problem 1 of the lower-layered controller are shown in Table 2. In addition, IPOPT in CasADi developed by Andersson et al. (2019), which is a nonlinear programming solver, was used to solve the optimization problem. 

4.3 Simulation Results 

In the traffic simulator, controlled vehicles were placed every five vehicles throughout the traffic stream. Traffic Fig. 5. Spatiotemporal velocity distributions flow simulations for 17 minutes were conducted for the following three cases: 

Case I: Without intervention 

Case II: With the proposed hierarchical controller 

Case III: With the lower-layered controller ( ϕ ≡ 1) The effectiveness of the proposed system was evaluated from the following two perspectives: (A) Traffic congestion suppression: This evaluation inves-tigates whether velocity reduction and the propa-gation of deceleration waves in traffic flow are sup-pressed. (B) Intervention efficiency: This evaluation investigates how effectively unnecessary intervention to the driver can be reduced. First, in order to evaluate (A) Traffic congestion sup-pression, the spatiotemporal velocity distributions under each condition were compared. The results are shown in Fig. 5. In the figure, a large low-velocity region appears in Case I around 400–1000 s, indicating the occurrence of traffic congestion. In contrast, the low-velocity region is significantly reduced in Cases II and III. To further evaluate the traffic state from a statistical perspective, the distribution of minimum velocity in each 1 s interval for all vehicles was compared. The results are shown in Fig. 6. In the figure, the proposed TTC-based control in Cases II and III successfully shifts the entire velocity distribution toward a higher range. In particular, there is a significant reduction in the number of vehicles with velocities below 12 m/s, compared with Case I. These results indicate that the proposed control system efficiently suppresses traffic congestion. Furthermore, we investigate the effects of the upper-layered controller Ku. There is essentially no major differ-ence between Case II, where Ku is introduced to moder-ately inactivate the lower-layered controller Kl, and Case III, where Kl remains constantly active. However, in the 

Fig. 6. Distribution of minimum velocity in each 1 sinterval Table 3. Average velocity under each condition     

> Condition Average velocity [m/s] Case I 12.789 Case II 15.577 Case III 15.377

velocity range above 15 m /s, it is apparent that velocities in Case II are slightly lower than those in Case III. The average velocity under each condition is shown in Table 3. From these results, both Cases II and III improve the average velocity compared with Case I. Since there is no major difference between Cases II and III, we conclude that Ku successfully suppresses unnecessary interventions. To evaluate (B) intervention efficiency, the total interven-tion time for controlled vehicles was compared between Case II and Case III. The total intervention time was 10071 .3 s for Case III, whereas it was reduced to 2369 .1 s for Case II. Notably, Case II reduces the frequency of intervention by 76 .5% compared to Case III. This reduction in intervention frequency is expected to reduce driver frus-tration and anxiety, thereby enhancing user acceptance. While there is no major difference in traffic congestion suppression performance between the two cases, Case II outperforms Case III in terms of intervention frequency. These results demonstrate that the hierarchical control in Case II contributes to suppressing traffic congestion without imposing a significant burden on the driver. 5. CONCLUSION In this manuscript, a hierarchical control system was pro-posed to simultaneously suppress traffic congestion and reduce driver burden. In the proposed system, the lower-layered controller intervenes in microscopic driving behav-ior based on CBF to suppress the propagation of decel-eration waves by maintaining sufficient temporal margins for following vehicles. Meanwhile, the upper-layered con-troller monitors the macroscopic traffic conditions of the following vehicle platoon and activates the lower-layered controllers only when the propagation of a deceleration wave is predicted. Furthermore, the proposed system was evaluated using a traffic flow simulator. The simulation results demonstrated that the proposed system reduces intervention time by approximately 76 .5% while main-taining traffic congestion suppression performance. These results indicate that the proposed system has the potential to simultaneously stabilize traffic flow and reduce driver burden through the control of only a limited number of vehicles. As future work, the upper-layered controller will be ex-tended to predict future deceleration of the preceding vehicles rather than relying solely on the states of the following vehicle platoon. We will also introduce anticipa-tory interventions before deceleration waves emerge. Such a predictive framework is expected to achieve earlier and more effective traffic flow stabilization. REFERENCES Ames, A.D., Coogan, S., Egerstedt, M., Notomista, G., Sreenath, K., and Tabuada, P. (2019). Control bar-rier functions: Theory and applications. In 2019 18th European Control Conference (ECC) , 3420–3431. doi: 10.23919/ECC.2019.8796030. Andersson, J.A.E., Gillis, J., Horn, G., Rawlings, J.B., and Diehl, M. (2019). Casadi: a software framework for non-linear optimization and optimal control. Mathematical Programming Computation , 11(1), 1–36. Fan, T., Chen, J., and Chung, E. (2025). Integrating micro and macro traffic control for mixed autonomy traffic. 

Communications in Transportation Research , 5, 100188. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commtr.2025.100188. Ferrara, A., Incremona, G.P., Birliba, E., and Goatin, P. (2022). Multi-scale model-based hierarchical con-trol of freeway traffic via platoons of connected and automated vehicles. IEEE Open Journal of In-telligent Transportation Systems , 3, 799–812. doi: 10.1109/OJITS.2022.3217001. Hanshin Expressway Co., Ltd. (2018). Zen traffic data. Available from: 

https://zen-traffic-data.net/english/ . Accessed 21 May 2026. Hayward, J.C. (1972). Near miss determination through use of a scale of danger. Li, T., Wu, J., Chan, C.Y., Liu, M., Zhu, C., Lu, W., and Hu, K. (2020). A cooperative lane change model for connected and automated vehicles. IEEE Access , 8, 54940–54951. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2981169. Li, Z., Liu, Y., and Shen, Z. (2025). Safety-critical control of connected vehicle systems based on barrier functions. 

IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Sys-tems .Liu, L., Zhu, L., and Yang, D. (2016). Modeling and simulation of the car-truck heterogeneous traffic flow based on a nonlinear car-following model. Applied Mathematics and Computation , 273, 706–717. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2015.10.032. Paden, B., ˇC´ ap, M., Yong, S.Z., Yershov, D., and Fraz-zoli, E. (2016). A survey of motion planning and con-trol techniques for self-driving urban vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , 1(1), 33–55. doi: 10.1109/TIV.2016.2578706. Paiva, S., Pa˜ neda, X.G., Corcoba, V., Garc´ ıa, R., Mor´ an, P., Pozueco, L., Vald´ es, M., and del Camino, C. (2021). User preferences in the design of advanced driver assistance systems. Sustainability , 13(7). doi: 10.3390/su13073932. Ploeg, J., van de Wouw, N., and Nijmeijer, H. (2014). Lp string stability of cascaded systems: Applica-tion to vehicle platooning. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology , 22(2), 786–793. doi: 10.1109/TCST.2013.2258346. Saifuzzaman, M. and Zheng, Z. (2014). Incorporating human-factors in car-following models: A review of recent developments and research needs. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies , 48, 379–403. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2014.09.008. Sugiyama, Y., Fukui, M., Kikuchi, M., Hasebe, K., Nakayama, A., Nishinari, K., Tadaki, S.i., and Yukawa, S. (2008). Traffic jams without bottle-necks—experimental evidence for the physical mecha-nism of the formation of a jam. New Journal of Physics ,10(3), 033001. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/10/3/033001. Swaroop, D. and Hedrick, J. (1995). String stability of interconnected systems. In Proceedings of 1995 American Control Conference - ACC’95 , volume 3, 1806–1810 vol.3. doi:10.1109/ACC.1995.531196. Talebpour, A. and Mahmassani, H.S. (2016). Influ-ence of connected and autonomous vehicles on traf-fic flow stability and throughput. Transportation Re-search Part C: Emerging Technologies , 71, 143–163. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.07.007. Treiber, M., Hennecke, A., and Helbing, D. (2000). Con-gested traffic states in empirical observations and micro-scopic simulations. Physical Review E , 62(2), 1805–1824. doi:10.1103/physreve.62.1805. Treiber, M. and Kesting, A. (2012). Traffic flow dynam-ics: data, models and simulation . Springer Science & Business Media. Zhao, C., Yu, H., and Molnar, T.G. (2023). Safety-critical traffic control by connected automated vehicles. Trans-portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies , 154, 104230. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2023.104230.