Title: DVL-DeepONet: A Physics-Guided Operator Learning for Resilient Underwater Navigation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.23502v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 03:43:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# DVL-DeepONet: A Physics-Guided Operator Learning for Resilient Underwater Navigation 

## Arup Kumar Sahoo a,∗, Itzik Klein a

> a

The Hatter Department of Marine Technologies, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, 3498838, Israel 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :DeepONet Inertial Sensors Doppler Velocity Log Underwater Navigation Least Squares Estimation Autonomous Underwater Vehi-cles 

Abstract 

Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) rely heavily on the fusion of inertial sensors and Doppler velocity logs (DVLs) for navigation. In standard autonomous navigation systems, the DVL measures four beam velocities, thereby enabling the estimation of the AUV velocity vector. However, during real-world missions, the DVL may receive noisy or incomplete beam measurements due to marine obstacles, seabed reflections, or environmental disturbances. Furthermore, some low-cost underwater platforms operate without inertial sensors to reduce system complexity and cost. In such cases, reliable estimation of the AUV velocity vector in real-world missing beam scenarios, becomes challenging, leading to degraded navigation solutions. To circumvent these challenges and enable resilient un-derwater navigation, we propose DVL-DeepONet, a physics-guided deep neural operator framework along with three variants. The proposed models are designed to estimate DVL-based velocity information under multiple operational scenarios, including (i) noise-resilient estimation in coupled inertial/DVL measurements, (ii) DVL-only learning, and (iii) beam measurement recovery. By learning a nonlinear operator that maps temporal inertial/DVL observations directly to vehicle velocity while enforcing DVL measurement physics through a consistency constraint, the proposed approach enables robust velocity estimation even under degraded sensing conditions. The proposed framework is validated using real-world AUV experiments, comprising a cumulative path length of approximately 10,000 m. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed DVL-DeepONet architectures outperform baseline model-based approaches and learning-based algorithms by 40%. 

## 1. Introduction 

Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) are increasingly employed in marine missions such as oceanographic surveying, underwater infras-tructure inspection, environmental monitoring, and military operations [1, 2]. The success and operational effectiveness of these missions in-herently depend on accurate navigation of AUVs. However, this objective remains a significant chal-lenge in deep underwater environments. Since global navigation satellite system signals cannot penetrate underwater, AUVs commonly rely on the fusion of inertial navigation systems (INS) and Doppler velocity logs (DVL) for navigation. The INS provides continuous navigation states using inertial measurements obtained from accelerom-eters and gyroscopes [3, 4], while the DVL pro-vides velocity measurements via acoustic Doppler sensing [5, 6]. Though INS sensors provide high-rate navi-gation estimates, their errors accumulate over time due to sensor noise and bias, leading to 

> ∗

Corresponding author  

> asahoo@campus.haifa.ac.il

(A.K. Sahoo);  

> kitzik@univ.haifa.ac.il

(I. Klein) 

orcid (s): 0000-0003-4515-7434 (A.K. Sahoo);  

> 0000-0001-7846-0654

(I. Klein) 

significant navigation drift [7, 8]. To mitigate this, DVL measurements are commonly integrated into the navigation framework as aiding velocity up-dates. In standard bottom-lock operation, the DVL transmits four acoustic beams toward the seafloor and estimates the vehicle velocity vector by exploiting the Doppler effect. Due to its high velocity accuracy, the DVL plays a critical role in underwater navigation systems [9]. Over the years, a wide range of velocity estima-tion strategies have been investigated, including classical model-based approaches such as least-squares (LS) estimator, Kalman filtering, loosely coupled and tightly coupled INS/DVL integration, factor-graph optimization, and information-aided estimation methods [10, 11, 12]. Despite their success, robust velocity estimation across diverse underwater operating conditions remains an open challenge. In practice, both inertial and DVL measurements are affected by sensor noise, environmental disturbances, and measurement uncertainties, which can significantly degrade estimation accuracy. Furthermore, in certain applications, only DVL measurements may be available, necessitating velocity estimation with-out inertial data. The problem becomes even more challenging when DVL beam measurements are Page 1 of 15 

> arXiv:2606.23502v1 [cs.RO] 22 Jun 2026 DVL-DeepONet

partially unavailable due to acoustic interference, poor bottom-lock conditions, marine obsta-cles, rough seafloor terrain, temporary sensor degradation, or aggressive AUV maneuvers [13]. In such circumstances, conventional model-based approaches may experience significant performance degradation, leading to navigation solution drift. To overcome these limitations, recent ad-vances in sensing technologies and computa-tional capabilities have motivated the adoption of data-driven approaches based on machine learning and deep learning. For inertial/DVL-integrated navigation, sev-eral learning-based approaches have been inves-tigated as either end-to-end estimators or hy-brid frameworks combined with model-based fil-tering algorithms. BeamsNet [14] introduced a neural-network-based velocity estimator that di-rectly maps DVL beam measurements and iner-tial observations to vehicle velocity. More recently, ResAlignNet [15], DMIAN [16], and several other hybrid learning-filtering frameworks [17, 18] have been explored for inertial/DVL fusion through er-ror state estimation. These methods have demon-strated improved robustness and accuracy over model-based techniques. For DVL-only navigation tasks, data-driven models have been developed to extract navigation information directly from beam measurements without relying on auxiliary inertial sensors. DC-Net [19] demonstrated the effectiveness of con-volutional neural networks for DVL calibration, while UDON [20] explored learning-based under-water odometry using DVL observations. Nev-ertheless, learning-based approaches for direct DVL-only velocity estimation remain compara-tively limited. Furthermore, under degraded DVL operating conditions, including partial beam availability and beam outages, several learning-based methods have focused on recovering missing information. LiBeamsNet [21] addressed limited-beam scenarios by reconstructing missing beam measurements using available beams and inertial data. MissBeamNet [22] further investigated learning-based velocity estimation under beam outages, while LAS [13] proposed adaptive strategies for maintaining navigation performance in degraded DVL conditions. More recently, Miao et al. [23] developed a physics-guided long short-term memory (LSTM)-based framework for robust AUV navigation under degraded underwater observations. Despite these advances, most existing learning-based approaches are tailored to specific naviga-tion scenarios [24, 25]. As a result, a unified learning framework capable of operating across diverse conditions within a single paradigm is still lacking. Furthermore, while these methods have demonstrated promising performance, they generally operate as black-box predictors and do not explicitly exploit the underlying DVL observation model that governs the relationship between beam measurements and vehicle veloc-ity. Consequently, achieving physically consistent and robust velocity estimation across a wide range of operating scenarios, while reducing reliance on expensive external sensors and complex multi-sensor integration architectures, remains an open challenge. Meanwhile, operator-learning methods have emerged as a powerful paradigm for learning mappings between functional inputs and out-puts. Deep Operator Networks (DeepONets), in-troduced by Lu et al. [26], have achieved re-markable success in scientific machine learn-ing, surrogate modeling, and dynamical system prediction [27]. Unlike conventional neural net-works, DeepONets preserve the physical proper-ties of the system and offer white-box predic-tion. Additionally, it learns operators rather than pointwise mappings, enabling efficient modeling of complex temporal and spatial dependencies. Although DeepONets have been successfully ap-plied to a variety of engineering problems along-side land vehicle dynamics [28], their application to underwater navigation and DVL-based velocity estimation remains largely unexplored. Motivated by these challenges, this research introduces DVL-DeepONet, a physics-guided op-erator learning framework for underwater velocity estimation. Unlike conventional DVL navigation methods that rely on explicit matrix inversion, the proposed framework incorporates the DVL observation model solely as a physics-based con-sistency constraint during training. By avoiding direct inversion of the beam geometry matrix, the framework eliminates the rank requirements associated with LS reconstruction. Consequently, DVL-DeepONet enables robust and accurate ve-locity estimation under severe beam outages and degraded sensing conditions. Furthermore, the framework is designed to operate under three different sensing condi-tions. DVL-DeepONet-I addresses noise-resilient estimation using inertial and DVL beam data. DVL-DeepONet-II focuses on DVL only beam-to-velocity operator learning and enables velocity estimation even in the absence of inertial measurements. DeepONet-III handles scenarios involving partial or missing beam configurations. By integrating (a) physical consistency, (b) temporal sensor fusion, and (c) operator learning, 

> Page 2 of 15 DVL-DeepONet

the proposed approach aims to provide accurate and resilient velocity estimation for real-world underwater navigation. The contributions of this research are outlined as follows: 1. A novel physics-guided DVL-DeepONet framework, uniquely designed to forecast DVL velocity vector. 2. Three complementary DVL-DeepONet ar-chitectures to address practical underwater navigation scenarios. 3. Extensive validation on AUV datasets col-lected from real-world sea trials and compet-itive baselines, demonstrating improved ro-bustness, velocity estimation accuracy, and navigation performance. 4. To support the reproduction of results and encourage future research and benchmark-ing, our codebase has been made publicly available on https://github.com/ansfl/DVL-DeepO Net .The proposed framework is validated using real-world AUV datasets collected during sea tri-als in the Mediterranean Sea, Israel, compris-ing approximately 10,000 m of underwater nav-igation trajectories. Extensive experiments are conducted under noisy measurements, partial beam outages, and limited sensing scenarios. The results demonstrate that the proposed DVL-DeepONet framework provides accurate and re-silient velocity estimation under challenging un-derwater conditions. Our approach offers an av-erage improvement of 40% over baselines. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the problem formu-lation and DVL measurement model. Section 3 introduces the DVL-DeepONet framework and network architectures. Section 4 presents the experimental results and analysis. Finally, Sec-tion 5 concludes the paper. 

## 2. Problem Formulation 

This section formulates the DVL velocity es-timation problem and highlights the challenges associated with limited and degraded beam mea-surements. 

2.1. Least-Squares Velocity Reconstruction 

A standard DVL employs four acoustic trans-ducers commonly arranged in a Janus (X) con-figuration. Each transducer emits an acoustic beam toward the seafloor as depicted in Fig. 1 and measures the Doppler frequency shift of the reflected signal [29]. Let 𝐛 𝑖 , 𝑖 = 1 , 2, 3, 4, denote the beam direction vectors defined in the DVL frame. Thus, the DVL projection matrix is obtained as 

𝐇 =

⎡⎢⎢⎢⎣

𝐛 1

𝐛 2

𝐛 3

𝐛 4

⎤⎥⎥⎥⎦

∈ ℝ4×3 . (1) The beam measurement model is [30] 

𝐲 = 𝐇𝐯 𝑑 𝑏 + 𝐧 , (2) where 𝐧 denotes measurement noise, 𝐲 is the measured beam velocity, and 𝐯 𝑑 𝑏 is the AUV veloc-ity vector expressed in the DVL coordinate frame. The objective of the DVL processing stage is to reconstruct the velocity vector from the beam measurements. The standard DVL solution em-ploys a LS estimator to solve (2). The estimation problem can be formulated as [6]: ̂

𝐯 𝑑 𝑏 = arg min 

> 𝐯

‖‖‖̃

𝐲 − 𝐇𝐯 𝑑 𝑏 

‖‖‖ 

> 22

. (3) The solution to (3) is ̂

𝐯 𝑑 𝑏 = ( 𝐇 𝑇 𝐇 )−1 𝐇 𝑇 ̃ 𝐲 . (4) Although computationally efficient, the LS so-lution is sensitive to noisy beam measurements, outliers, and limited beam availability. In practi-cal underwater environments, these issues may significantly degrade the algorithm performance. 

2.2. Navigation Under Limited DVL Measurements 

In a DVL-missing-beams, a beam availability vector at time 𝑘 is defined as 

𝐦 𝑘 = [ 𝑚 1,𝑘 , 𝑚 2,𝑘 , 𝑚 3,𝑘 , 𝑚 4,𝑘 ]𝑇 , 𝑚 𝑖,𝑘 ∈ {0 , 1} , (5) The corresponding masking matrix is 

𝐌 𝑘 = diag( 𝐦 𝑘 ) ∈ ℝ4×4 . (6) The partially observed beam measurements are 

𝐲 𝑝 𝑘 = 𝐌 𝑘 𝐲 𝑘 . (7) Substituting the beam measurement model (2) into the (7) yields  

> Page 3 of 15 DVL-DeepONet
> Figure 1: Geometry of the four-beam Janus DVL mounted on the AUV and the associated body-fixed coordinate system.

𝐲 𝑝 𝑘 = 𝐌 𝑘 

(

𝐇𝐯 𝑑 𝑏,𝑘 + 𝐧 𝑘 

)

. (8) The number of available beams is 

𝑁 𝑏,𝑘 =

> 4

∑

> 𝑖 =1

𝑚 𝑖,𝑘 . (9) When 𝑁 𝑏,𝑘 ≥ 3 a reduced LS solution may still be computed. However, when 𝑁 𝑏,𝑘 < 3, the velocity estimation problem becomes underdetermined, as 

rank( 𝐇 𝑝 𝑘 ) < 3. (10) Here 𝐇 𝑝 𝑘 ∈ ℝ𝑁 𝑏,𝑘 ×3 denotes the reduced beam projection matrix obtained by removing the rows of 𝐇 corresponding to unavailable beams at time step 𝑘 .Consequently, a unique velocity solution no longer exists, and conventional LS estimation be-comes unreliable or infeasible. These challenges motivate the development of robust approaches capable of exploiting both inertial measurements and partial beam observations to estimate the AUV velocity under degraded sensing conditions. 

## 3. Proposed DVL-DeepONet Framework 

This section discusses a family of physics-guided operator learning models, termed DVL-DeepONet, for resilient underwater velocity esti-mation under varying sensor availability condi-tions. DeepONet was selected as the backbone archi-tecture because the underwater navigation prob-lem considered in this work can be naturally formulated as an operator-learning task. Deep-ONet is a neural operator framework that is even capable of learning mappings between infinite-dimensional function spaces. Its formulation is mathematically grounded in the universal ap-proximation theorem for operators [26]. Rather than estimating velocity from a single sensor snapshot, the objective is to learn a mapping from a temporal history of beam measurements to the corresponding AUV velocity vector. To further improve physical consistency, DVL-DeepONet incorporates an LS beam consistency constraint during training. It ensures that the predicted velocity remains compatible with the underlying DVL measurement geometry. We begin by presenting DVL-DeepONet and then address three different real-world scenarios: (i) noise-resilient estimation, (ii) DVL-only learning, and (iii) beam measurement recovery. 

3.1. DVL-DeepONet Framework 

The proposed framework integrates DeepONet with DVL beam geometry and LS physical 

> Page 4 of 15 DVL-DeepONet

constraints to estimate the velocity vector under noisy, degraded, and partially observable sensing conditions. Let 𝐲 𝑘 denote the DVL beam measurements at time step 𝑘 ,

𝐲 𝑘 = [ 𝑦 1,𝑘 , 𝑦 2,𝑘 , 𝑦 3,𝑘 , 𝑦 4,𝑘 ]𝑇 ∈ ℝ4, (11) where 𝑦 𝑖,𝑘 is the velocity measured by the 𝑖 -th DVL beam. Similarly, let 𝐮 𝑘 denote the synchronized IMU measurement vector, 

𝐮 𝑘 = [ 𝑓 𝑥,𝑘 , 𝑓 𝑦,𝑘 , 𝑓 𝑧,𝑘 , 𝜔 𝑥,𝑘 , 𝜔 𝑦,𝑘 , 𝜔 𝑧,𝑘 ]𝑇 ∈ ℝ6, (12) where 𝑓 𝑥,𝑘 , 𝑓 𝑦,𝑘 , and 𝑓 𝑧,𝑘 are the averaged specific-force components, and 𝜔 𝑥,𝑘 , 𝜔 𝑦,𝑘 , and 𝜔 𝑧,𝑘 are the averaged angular-rate components associated with the 𝑘 -th DVL interval. To align with the Deep-ONet structure, the inertial readings are averaged between two successive DVL measurements. To capture temporal dependencies, a sliding window of length 𝑊 is employed. The correspond-ing DVL and IMU histories are 

𝐘 𝑘 = [ 𝐲 𝑘 −𝑊 +1 , … , 𝐲 𝑘 ] ∈ ℝ𝑊 ×4 , (13) 

𝐔 𝑘 = [ 𝐮 𝑘 −𝑊 +1 , … , 𝐮 𝑘 ] ∈ ℝ𝑊 ×6 , (14) where 𝑘 denotes the current discrete-time index. DVL-DeepONet architecture consists of branch and trunk networks. The branch input 𝐁 𝑘 is constructed by channel-wise concatenation, 

𝐁 𝑘 = [ 𝐘 𝑘 || 𝐔 𝑘 ] ∈ ℝ𝑊 ×𝐷 , (15) where || denotes concatenation and 𝐷 denotes the number of synchronized sensor channels. For the considered DVL–IMU configuration, 𝐷 = 4 + 6 = 10 

channels. The synchronized sensor channels are jointly processed by the branch encoder to learn a latent representation of the recent vehicle dynamics. The objective is to learn a nonlinear operator 

𝜃 ∶ ( 𝐁 𝑘 , 𝜏 𝑘 ) → 𝐯 𝑘 , (16) where 𝐯 𝑘 denotes the velocity vector: 

𝐯 𝑘 = [ 𝑣 𝑥 , 𝑣 𝑦 , 𝑣 𝑧 ]𝑇 ∈ ℝ3, (17) and 𝜏 𝑘 is the normalized temporal coordinate defined by: 

𝜏 𝑘 = 𝑡 𝑘 − 𝜇 𝑡 

𝜎 𝑡 

. (18) The branch network 𝐁 𝑘 encodes the synchronized IMU/DVL history into a latent representation. 

𝐁 𝑘 is implemented as a one-dimensional (1-D) convolutional encoder. Since the input to the convolutional layers is arranged as channels by time, the branch input is internally converted to ̃

𝐁 𝑘 = 𝐁 ⊤𝑘 ∈ ℝ𝐷 ×𝑊 . (19) Then, the convolutional encoder is defined as 

𝐡 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑏

= 𝜎 

(

𝐖 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑏

∗ 𝐡 (𝑙 −1)  

> 𝑏

+ 𝐛 (𝑙 )

> 𝑏

)

, 𝑙 = 1 , 2, 3, (20) where 𝐡 (0)  

> 𝑏

=̃ 𝐁 𝑘 denotes the branch input, 𝐡 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑏

is the feature map of the 𝑙 -th convolutional layer, 

𝐖 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑏

and 𝐛 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑏

represents the trainable convolution kernels and bias parameters, respectively, (∗) de-notes 1-D convolution along with the temporal axis, and 𝜎 (⋅) is the nonlinear activation function. The output of the final convolutional layer is flattened and passed through a fully connected projection layer to obtain the branch latent rep-resentation 

𝐳 𝑏 = 𝜙 𝑏 

(

vec 

(

𝐡 (3) 

> 𝑏

)) 

∈ ℝ𝑝 , (21) where vec( ⋅) denotes the flattening operation, 𝜙 𝑏 (⋅)

represents the fully connected projection, and 𝑝 

denotes the latent embedding dimension of the DeepONet architecture. Let 𝜃 𝑏 denote the branch encoder with train-able parameters 𝜃 𝑏 . It consists of three 1-D con-volutional layers with 32, 64, and 64 output channels, respectively. Equivalently, the branch encoder can be written compactly as 

𝐳 𝑏 = 𝜃 𝑏 (𝐁 𝑘 ) ∈ ℝ𝑝 . (22) Thus, the branch network explicitly fuses DVL beam measurements and IMU observations through channel-wise concatenation before temporal convolutional feature extraction. Next, the trunk network maps the normalized temporal coordinate 𝜏 𝑘 into the latent operator space through a multilayer perceptron defined as 

𝐡 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑡

= 𝜙 

(

𝐖 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑡

𝐡 (𝑙 −1)  

> 𝑡

+ 𝐛 (𝑙 )

> 𝑡

)

, 𝑙 = 1 , … , 𝐿, (23) where 𝐡 (0)  

> 𝑡

= 𝜏 𝑘 , 𝐖 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑡

and 𝐛 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑡

denote the trainable weight matrices and bias vectors, respectively, 

> Page 5 of 15 DVL-DeepONet

and 𝜙 (⋅) is the nonlinear activation function. The output of the final hidden layer is projected to the trunk latent representation 

𝐳 𝑡 = 𝜃 𝑡 (𝜏 𝑘 ) ∈ ℝ𝑝 , (24) where 𝜃 𝑡 is the trunk encoder MLP parameterized by 𝜃 𝑡 .In the implemented architecture, the trunk encoder maps the scalar temporal input to alatent representation of dimension 𝑝 = 128 . The trunk encoder consists of three fully connected layers with 64, 128, and 128 neurons, respec-tively, with tanh activation function. Following the DeepONet principle, the branch and trunk embeddings are fused through element-wise mul-tiplication 

𝐳 𝑘 = 𝐳 𝑏 ⊙ 𝐳 𝑡 . (25) Furthermore, the fused latent representation is subsequently processed by a prediction head MLP consisting of two hidden fully connected layers with 128 and 64 neurons, respectively, followed by an output layer with three neurons corre-sponding to the velocity components. The predic-tion head employs the sigmoid linear unit (SiLU) activation function in the hidden layers. It may be compactly written as ̂

𝐯 𝑘 = 𝜃 ℎ (𝐳 𝑘 ), (26) where 𝜃 ℎ (⋅) denotes the prediction head MLP parameterized by 𝜃 ℎ, and ̂ 𝐯 𝑘 is the predicted vehi-cle velocity vector. Therefore, the DVL-DeepONet operator approximation results in ̂

𝐯 𝑘 = 𝜃 ℎ

(

𝜃 𝑏 (𝐁 𝑘 ) ⊙ 𝜃 𝑡 (𝜏 𝑘 )

)

. (27) The proposed framework consists of three complementary operator-learning architectures, which are designed o handle noisy DVL and inertial measurements (DVL-DeepONet-I), DVL-only operation (DVL-DeepONet-II), and partial sensor availability (DVL-DeepONet-III), respec-tively, as shown in Table 1. The overall framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. In all three DVL-DeepONet variants, the framework exploits temporal sensor histories and nonlinear operator learning to cap-ture the underlying beam-to-velocity dynamics. 

3.2. Noise-Resilient Estimation 

DVL-DeepONet-I is designed for robust veloc-ity estimation under noisy IMU and DVL mea-surements. For a temporal window of length 𝑊 ,the branch input (15) is constructed as             

> Table 1
> Summary of DVL-DeepONet variants for estimating the DVL velocity vector in different conditions. Model IMU DVL Objective DVL-DeepONet-I ✓✓Noise-Resilient DVL-DeepONet-II ×✓DVL-Only DVL-DeepONet-III ✓Partial Beam Recovery

𝐁 𝑘 = [ 𝐲 𝑘 −𝑊 +1 , … , 𝐲 𝑘 , 𝐮 𝑘 −𝑊 +1 , … , 𝐮 𝑘 ] ∈ ℝ𝑊 ×10 . (28) The network learns the nonlinear operator 

(𝐼 ) 

> 𝜃

∶ ( 𝐁 𝑘 , 𝜏 𝑘 ) → 𝐯 𝑘 . (29) For a mini-batch of size 𝑁 , the supervised loss is defined as 

𝑣𝑒𝑙 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑖 =1

‖̂𝐯 𝑖 − 𝐯 𝑖 ‖22. (30) To enforce consistency with the DVL observation model introduced in (2), the predicted velocity is projected back into beam space, ̂

𝐲 𝑖 = 𝐇 ̂𝐯 𝑖 . (31) where 𝐇 ∈ ℝ4×3 denotes the DVL beam projection matrix (1). Building on the DVL beam projection matrix, the residual is defined as 

𝐫 𝑖 = 𝐲 𝑖 − 𝐇 ̂ 𝐯 𝑖 , (32) Thereby, the physics-informed loss can be written as 

𝐿𝑆 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑖 =1

𝐫 𝑇 𝑖 𝐫 𝑖 . (33) Combining (30) and (33) leads to the total loss 

 = 𝜆 𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑣𝑒𝑙 + 𝜆 𝐿𝑆 𝐿𝑆 . (34) where 𝜆 𝑣𝑒𝑙 and 𝜆 𝐿𝑆 denote positive weighting co-efficients. Based on extensive hyperparameter tuning through a series of trial-and-error experi-ments, the coefficients were fixed at 𝜆 𝑣𝑒𝑙 = 1 and 

𝜆 𝐿𝑆 = 0 .1.The LS consistency term acts as a geometry-aware physical regularizer that constrains the learned velocity to remain compatible with the DVL beam observation model. The optimized net-work parameters satisfy 

Θ∗ = arg min  

> Θ

(Θ) . (35)  

> Page 6 of 15 DVL-DeepONet
> Figure 2: Schematic illustration of the proposed DVL-DeepONet architecture.

3.3. DVL-Only Learning 

DVL-DeepONet-II addresses scenarios where IMU measurements are unavailable or unreliable. In this case, the branch input contains only DVL beam observations. For a temporal window of length 𝑊 , the branch input is constructed as 

𝐁 𝑘 = [𝐲 𝑘 −𝑊 +1 , 𝐲 𝑘 −𝑊 +2 , … , 𝐲 𝑘 

] ∈ ℝ𝑊 ×4 . (36) The learned operator becomes 

(𝐼𝐼 ) 

> 𝜃

∶ ( 𝐁 𝑘 , 𝜏 𝑘 ) → 𝐯 𝑘 . (37) DVL-DeepONet-II is trained using the same su-pervised loss (30), and physics-informed loss (33). 

3.4. Beam Measurement Recovery 

DVL-DeepONet-III is developed for navigation under DVL beam outages. A key distinction be-tween the proposed framework and conventional model-based DVL velocity reconstruction lies in the treatment of missing beam measurements. Unlike the traditional LS estimator formulation in (4), DVL-DeepONet-III does not estimate velocity through matrix inversion. Instead, the DVL obser-vation model is incorporated as a physics-guided constraint, while the velocity is inferred through operator learning. Consequently, the framework is not restricted by the rank requirements of conventional LS reconstruction and can operate even when only one or two DVL beams are avail-able. The available beam measurement provides partial physical information, whereas the missing information is recovered from synchronized IMU observations, temporal context, and previously learned beam-to-velocity mappings. This enables accurate velocity estimation even under severe beam outages. Using the partial DVL measurements in (7) and the synchronized IMU observations in (15), the branch input is evolved as 

𝐁 𝑘 = [ 𝐲 𝑝 𝑘 −𝑊 +1 , … , 𝐲 𝑝 𝑘 , 𝐮 𝑘 −𝑊 +1 , … , 𝐮 𝑘 ]. (38) The corresponding operator is 

(𝐼𝐼𝐼 ) 

> 𝜃

∶ ( 𝐁 𝑘 , 𝜏 𝑘 ) → 𝐯 𝑘 . (39) The supervised velocity loss associated with par-tial beams is defined as 

𝑝 −𝑣𝑒𝑙 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑘 =1

‖̂ 𝐯 𝑘 − 𝐯 𝑘 ‖22. (40) To enforce consistency with the partial DVL beam measurements, a masked physics-informed loss is introduced as 

𝑝 −𝐿𝑆 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑘 =1 4

∑

> 𝑖 =1

𝑚 𝑖,𝑘 (̂𝑦 𝑘,𝑖 − 𝑦 𝑘,𝑖 )2, (41) Consequently, the total loss is 

 = 𝜆 𝑝 −𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑝 −𝑣𝑒𝑙 + 𝜆 𝑝 −𝐿𝑆 𝑝 −𝐿𝑆 , (42) where 𝜆 𝑝 −𝑣𝑒𝑙 , 𝜆 𝑝 −𝐿𝑆 > 0 are weighting coefficients. 

3.5. Training 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete training workflow. The proposed DVL-DeepONet frame-work was trained using the hyperparameters de-tailed in Table 2. 

## 4. Analysis and Results 

This section discusses the dataset, evaluation metrics, and results obtained by DVL-DeepONet. 

> Page 7 of 15 DVL-DeepONet

Algorithm 1: Training procedure of DVL-DeepONet (identical for all its three vari-ants). Construct branch input 𝐁 𝑘 ;Construct trunk input 𝜏 𝑘 ;Initialize network parameters Θ;

for each epoch do for each mini-batch do 

Compute 𝐳 𝑏 = 𝜃 𝑏 (𝐁 𝑘 );Compute 𝐳 𝑡 = 𝜃 𝑡 (𝜏 𝑘 );Fuse 𝐳 𝑘 = 𝐳 𝑏 ⊙ 𝐳 𝑡 ;Predict ̂ 𝐯 𝑘 = 𝜃 ℎ (𝐳 𝑘 );Compute vel using (30), or (40) in the missing beam scenario; Compute LS via (33) or (41) in the missing beam scenario; Compute total loss  using (34) or (42) in the missing beam scenario; Update Θ using backpropagation; 

if  < 𝜀 then return Θ

return Θ          

> Table 2
> Hyperparameters for DVL-DeepONet framework used in all three variants.
> Parameter Configuration
> Temporal Window ( 𝑊 )2Branch CNN 32-64-64 Trunk MLP 64-128-128 Prediction Head MLP 128-64-3 Optimizer AdamW Learning Rate 10 −3
> Batch Size 128 Epochs 100

4.1. AUV Dataset 

The AUV dataset was acquired using the Uni-versity of Haifa’s Snapir AUV during multiple sea trials conducted in the Mediterranean Sea, Israel [31]. Snapir is an [32] ECA Robotics modified A18D mid-size AUV designed for deep-water operations up to 3000 m and capable of missions lasting up to 21 hours. The platform IS mounted with an iXblue Phins Subsea INS [33], and a Tele-dyne RDI WorkHorse Navigator DVL [34], which provides velocity measurements with a nominal standard deviation of 0.02 m/s. The INS operates at 100 Hz, whereas the DVL provides measure-ments at 1 Hz. The dataset consists of multiple AUV maneuvers, each spanning approximately 400 s. These missions differ in path geometry, mission lengths, operating depth, and vehicle speed, as presented in Fig. 3. These thirteen  

> Figure 3: Top-view of the 13 AUV trajectories used in this study.

trajectories provide a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed DVL-DeepONet framework under varying operating conditions. For cross-validation purposes, we partition the dataset into three distinct splits. In the first, the training set comprises T1, T6–T13, and the validation set comprises T2 and T3. The remain-ing two trajectories, T4 and T5, are reserved for testing. The total path lengths of the training and testing datasets are approximately 7095 m and 1566 m, respectively. To maintain clarity and brevity, only the results and graphs obtained from the primary experimental configuration (Split 1) are reported in detail. More information regarding three-fold cross-validation splits are discussed later in Section 4.7.2. To construct the noisy DVL measurements, the DVL velocity measurements recorded during the AUV missions were first projected onto the four DVL beam directions using the beam geome-try matrix. The resulting beam measurements are given by 

𝐲 𝑘 = 𝐇𝐯 𝑑 𝑏,𝑘 , (43) where 𝐇 ∈ ℝ4×3 denotes the DVL beam geom-etry matrix and 𝐯 𝑑 𝑏,𝑘 is the DVL velocity vector expressed in the body frame. To emulate practical underwater environ-ments, scale-factor error, constant bias, and additive Gaussian noise were introduced into the beam measurements ̃

𝐲 𝑘 = (1 + 𝑠 𝐷𝑉 𝐿 )𝐇𝐯 𝑑 𝑏,𝑘 + 𝐛 𝐷𝑉 𝐿 + 𝜎 𝐷𝑉 𝐿 𝝐 𝑘 , (44) where 𝑠 𝐷𝑉 𝐿 = 0 .7% is the scale-factor error, 𝐛 𝐷𝑉 𝐿 =0.001 𝟏 4 is the bias vector, 𝜎 𝐷𝑉 𝐿 = 0 .042 is the noise 

> Page 8 of 15 DVL-DeepONet

standard deviation, and 𝝐 𝑘 ∼  (𝟎 , 𝐈 4). The spe-cific error term values follow those used in [14]. To this end, the corrupted beam measurements ̃

𝐲 𝑘 were subsequently used as inputs in all our evaluations while, the IMU measurements were used directly as is without any addition of error terms. 

4.2. Performance Metrics 

To evaluate the velocity estimation perfor-mance, five quantitative metrics are employed. Let the predicted and ground-truth (GT) velocity vectors at time 𝑡 𝑖 be denoted by ̂ 𝐯 (𝑡 𝑖 ) and 𝐯 (𝑡 𝑖 ),respectively. 1. Velocity absolute error (VAE): VAE 𝑖 = ‖‖̂𝐯 (𝑡 𝑖 ) − 𝐯 (𝑡 𝑖 )‖‖2 . (45) 2. Velocity mean absolute error (VMAE): VMAE = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑖 =1

VAE 𝑖 , (46) where 𝑁 denotes the total number of sam-ples. 3. Velocity root mean square error (VRMSE): VRMSE =

√√√√ 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑖 =1

(VAE 𝑖 )2. (47) 4. Coefficient of determination ( 𝑅 2): 

𝑅 2(̇𝑥 𝑗 ,̂̇𝑥 𝑗 ) = 1 − 

∑𝑁 𝑖 =1 

(̇𝑥 𝑗,𝑖 −̂̇ 𝑥 𝑗,𝑖 

)2

∑𝑁 𝑖 =1 

(̇𝑥 𝑗,𝑖 −̄̇ 𝑥 𝑗 

)2 , (48) where ̇ 𝑥 𝑗,𝑖 and ̂̇ 𝑥 𝑗,𝑖 denote the GT and pre-dicted values of the 𝑗 -th velocity component, respectively, and ̄̇ 𝑥 𝑗 is the mean of the corre-sponding GT component. 5. Variance accounted for (VAF): 

VAF( ̇𝑥 𝑗 ,̂̇𝑥 𝑗 ) = 

[

1 − var (̇𝑥 𝑗 −̂̇ 𝑥 𝑗 

)

var (̇𝑥 𝑗 

)]

× 100 . (49) 

4.3. Implementation 

The proposed DVL-DeepONet framework was implemented in Python using the PyTorch deep learning library. All experiments were conducted on the hardware platform described in Table 3.           

> Table 3
> Hardware configuration for DVL-DeepONet.
> Component Specification
> GPU NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 OS Linux (Debian) Architecture x86_64 CUDA Version 11.8 cuDNN Version 9.1 RAM 67.26 GB Memory 25.28 GB Tensor Cores 512 CPU Cores 24

4.4. Noise-Resilient Estimation 

Table 4 summarizes the performance of the proposed DVL-DeepONet-I framework under noisy IMU/DVL measurements and compares it against the model-based LS solution (4) and learning-based BeamsNetV1 [14] model. BeamsNetV1 is a CNN-based velocity reconstruc-tion framework that jointly exploits DVL beam measurements and IMU observations to estimate the AUV velocity vector. Owing to its sensor-fusion capability and demonstrated performance under noisy conditions, it serves as a strong learning-based baseline for comparison. The standard LS estimator yields a VRMSE of 0.129 m/s and a VMAE of 0.115 m/s. Al-though LS estimator provides a direct analyt-ical reconstruction of the vehicle velocity from the DVL beam measurements, its performance deteriorates under noisy conditions. This is be-cause measurement errors are directly propa-gated through the inversion process. However, learning-based algorithms such as Vanilla-CNN and BeamsNetV1 improve estimation accuracy marginally over the model-based algorithm due to their inherent noise-reduction ability. The proposed LS-DeepONet-I significantly outperforms all baseline methods. It achieves the lowest velocity reconstruction error, with a VRMSE of 0.105 m/s and a VMAE of 0.093 m/s. Compared with the LS estimator, Vanilla-CNN, and BeamsNetV1 approaches, the proposed model yields performance improvements of 18%, 10%, and 15%, respectively, corresponding to an average improvement of approximately 15%. Beyond average error metrics, DVL-DeepONet-I also demonstrates superior agreement with the GT velocity dynamics, achieving the highest mean 𝑅 2 score of 0.907 and VAF of 91%. These results indicate that the proposed operator-learning framework more accurately captures the underlying nonlinear relationship between noisy DVL/IMU measurements and vehicle velocity. Figures 4a and 4b illustrate the velocity re-construction error profiles for the two unseen test trajectories in split 1. For Trajectory 4, the                                  

> Page 9 of 15 DVL-DeepONet
> Table 4
> Performance comparison for noisy IMU/DVL measurements.
> Model VRMSE ↓VMAE ↓Mean 𝑅 2↑VAF (%) ↑VRMSE Gain (%) ↑
> Classical LS 0.129 0.115 0.846 84 18 Vanilla-CNN 0.116 0.097 0.880 88 10 BeamsNetV1 0.123 0.110 0.867 86 15 DVL-DeepONet-I 0.105 0.093 0.907 91 –
> (a) Test Trajectory 4 (b) Test Trajectory 5
> Figure 4: Velocity reconstruction error profiles of Trajectories 4 and 5 using DVL-DeepONet-I.

mean velocity error remains relatively consistent throughout the mission, oscillating around 0.08– 0.12 m/s. Trajectory 5 exhibits slightly larger error fluctuations, as the mean error increases to approximately 0.15–0.17 m/s. However, none of the trajectories exhibits a sustained growth in error over mission progress. This behavior sug-gests that DVL-DeepONet does not accumulate drift over time and maintains stable performance over long-duration missions. 

4.5. DVL-Only Learning 

To evaluate the DVL-DeepONet-II framework under reduced sensor availability, a second experiment was conducted using only DVL beam measurements, without any IMU information. This scenario is particularly relevant for low-cost underwater platforms and situations where inertial sensors become unavailable or unreliable. In such cases, velocity estimation must rely solely on the information contained in the four DVL beams. For the baseline comparison, we have used model-based LS estimator alongside learning-based vanilla-CNN and BeamsNetV2 [14] models. BeamsNetV2 is a DVL-only neural baseline that maps four-beam DVL measurements to the velocity vector. The model combines the current DVL beam vector with temporal features derived from ashort history of previous beam measurements to predict the AUV velocity components. Table 5 gives the performance of different baseline models when only DVL measurements are available. The proposed DVL-DeepONet-II achieves substantially the best overall perfor-mance with a VRMSE of 0.095 m/s and a VMAE of 0.085 m/s. Compared with the LS estimator, DVL-DeepONet-II reduces both VRMSE and VMAE by approximately 27%. Furthermore, the proposed method outperforms Vanilla-CNN and BeamsNetV2 baselines, achieving VRMSE reductions of 19% and 68%, respectively. Overall, these results correspond to an average improvement of approximately 38% over the considered baseline methods. In addition, DVL-DeepONet-II attains the highest mean 𝑅 2 value of 0.905 and the highest VAF of 91%, indicating a stronger agreement with the GT velocity dynamics. Although both DNN and Vanilla-CNN improve upon the classical LS solution, their performance remains inferior to that of DVL-DeepONet-II in all reported metrics. The results suggest that purely data-driven architectures are unable to fully exploit the underlying physical relationship between DVL beam measurements and vehicle velocity. 

4.6. Beam Measurement Recovery 

To evaluate the robustness of DVL-DeepONet-III under degraded sensing conditions, artificial beam outages were introduced in both the training and testing datasets. Specifically, one or two DVL beam measurements were randomly removed every two seconds, corresponding to every second DVL epoch. The corresponding unavailable beam measurements were masked using the beam-availability matrix defined in (5) and (6), while the synchronized IMU                                                          

> Page 10 of 15 DVL-DeepONet
> Table 5
> Performance comparison under DVL-only measurements.
> Model VRMSE ↓VMAE ↓Mean 𝑅 2↑VAF (%) ↑VRMSE Gain (%) ↑
> Classical LS 0.129 0.115 0.846 84 27 Vanilla-CNN 0.117 0.100 0.866 87 19 BeamsNetV2 0.300 0.258 -0.059 78 68 DVL-DeepONet-II 0.096 0.085 0.905 91 –
> Table 6
> Performance comparison under partial DVL beam availability.
> Model VRMSE ↓VMAE ↓Mean 𝑅 2↑VAF (%) ↑VRMSE Gain (%) ↑
> ELC 1.798 1.496 -38.428 -929 92 MissBeamNet 0.183 0.153 0.601 62 37 DVL-DeepONet-III 0.108 0.095 0.886 89 –

measurements remained available throughout the experiment. Then, our proposed algorithm is compared with baseline model-based extended loosely coupled (ELC) approach [25], and with learning-based MissBeamNet [22]. In the ELC approach, the missing beams are generated by virtual beams using the assumption of zero sway velocity or taking the last estimated velocity vector. Both approaches outperformed a simple average on the missing beams history. For the learning-based baselines, MissBeamNet employs an LSTM network to estimate missing DVL beam measurements from the available beams and their temporal evolution. The reconstructed beam vector is subsequently processed using the LS estimator to obtain the velocity vector, thereby providing a strong learning-based baseline for missing-beam scenarios. Table 6 presents the performance of proposed algorithm under partial DVL beam availability. Under this challenging scenario, ELC approach exhibits substantial performance degradation, yielding VRMSE values close to 2 m/s. The cor-responding negative 𝑅 2 and VAF values indicate that the traditional model-based techniques are less effective. MissBeamNet improves the reconstruction ac-curacy by LSTM algorithm. Consequently, the VRMSE decreases from approximately 1.8 m/s to 0.182 m/s, while the mean 𝑅 2 and VAF increase to 0.624 and 64%, respectively. The proposed DVL-DeepONet-III achieves the best performance across all evaluation metrics, obtaining a VRMSE of 0.114 m/s and a VMAE of 0.099 m/s. Compared with ELC, the proposed method reduces the VRMSE by approximately 92%, respectively. Furthermore, DVL-DeepONet-III outperforms MissBeamNet by reducing the VRMSE by approximately 37%. The proposed framework also achieves the highest mean 𝑅 2

score of 0.873 and VAF of 88%, indicating asignificantly stronger agreement with the GT velocity dynamics. Overall, DVL-DeepONet-III achieves 65% improvement over baselines. 

4.7. Ablation Study 

To better understand the contribution of the individual components of the proposed frame-work, an ablation study was conducted focus-ing on two aspects of DVL-DeepONet-I (i) tem-poral observation window length and (ii) cross-validation. 

4.7.1. Effect of Temporal Window Length 

The first ablation study investigated the in-fluence of the temporal observation window size (𝑊 ) used by the branch network. To this end, the model was trained and evaluated using window sizes ranging from 𝑊 = 2 to 𝑊 = 20 , while keeping all other hyperparameters unchanged. The VRMSE results as a function of the win-dow size are presented in Fig. 5. As shown in Fig. 5, the estimation accuracy initially improves as the window size increases. The best perfor-mance is achieved at 𝑊 = 10 , yielding a VRMSE of 0.078 m/s. Compared with 𝑊 = 2 , the VRMSE is reduced by approximately 17%, demonstrat-ing the benefit of incorporate additional tempo-ral information. However, further increasing the window size beyond 𝑊 = 10 leads to a gradual increase in VRMSE. This behavior suggests that excessively long windows may introduce redun-dant or less informative historical measurements. 

4.7.2. Cross-Validation Study 

Table 7 summarizes the trajectory distribution used in the three-fold cross-validation study. In 

> Page 11 of 15

DVL-DeepONet 

Table 7 

Cross-validation splits used for the evaluations.                     

> Split Train. Traj. Val. Traj. Test Traj. Train Dist. (m) Val. Dist. (m) Test Dist. (m) S1 1,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13 2,3 4,5 7094.26 1346.59 1566.93 S2 4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 1,13 2,3 7259.75 1496.86 1346.59 S3 1,2,3,4,5,6,11,12,13 7,8 9,10 6712.22 1686.80 1608.74

Table 8 

Cross-validation results for the noise-resilient estimation scenario.                                           

> Split Method VRMSE 𝑥 VRMSE 𝑦 VRMSE 𝑧 Improvement over LS (%) S1 Classical LS 0.088 0.090 0.023 N/A BeamsNetV1 0.082 0.088 0.021 05
> DVL-DeepONet-I 0.070 0.077 0.017 18
> S2 Classical LS 0.088 0.089 0.023 N/A BeamsNetV1 0.084 0.084 0.021 04
> DVL-DeepONet-I 0.060 0.062 0.012 31
> S3 Classical LS 0.086 0.087 0.024 N/A BeamsNetV1 0.081 0.082 0.021 06
> DVL-DeepONet-I 0.071 0.088 0.011 14 Avg. Improvement 21

Figure 5: Ablation study of the influence of temporal window size 𝑊 on the VRMSE of DVL-DeepONet in the noise-resilient estimation scenario. 

each fold, nine trajectories are used for training, two trajectories for validation, and two for testing, corresponding to an approximate 70%-15%-15% train-validation-test split. Fig. 6 shows the GT trajectories used as unseen test missions in the three-fold cross-validation study. Table 8 incor-porates cross-validation results of the proposed DVL-DeepONet-I framework in the noise-resilient estimation scenario. While BeamsNet provides only marginal gains of 5% on average, over the LS estimator, DVL-DeepONet-I achieves substan-tially larger improvements of 21%. The consistent 

Table 9 

Summary of the three DVL-DeepONet configurations with the best VRMSE improvement achieved in each scenario.           

> Scenario VRMSE ↓Best Gain (%) ↑
> Noise-Resilient Estimation 0.105 18 DVL-Only Learning 0.096 68 Beams Measurement Recovery 0.114 92

gains across all splits demonstrate that the pro-posed model is a reliable solution for practical underwater navigation scenarios. 

4.8. Summary 

The proposed DVL-DeepONet framework was evaluated in three challenging underwater nav-igation scenarios and demonstrated supervisor performance against other model-based and data-driven approaches as shown in Table 9. For the noisy IMU/DVL scenario, DVL-DeepONet-I achieved average performance im-provements of 15% over the baselines. Similarly, in the DVL-only scenario, the average gain by LS-DeepONet-II is 38%. Finally, under the measurement recovery, our model registered 65% improvement. Moreover, across all scenar-ios, the proposed operator-learning framework consistently outperformed both model-based approaches and conventional deep-learning baselines. Additionally, it maintains around 90% agreement with the GT, as evidenced by mean 𝑅 2

values. 

Page 12 of 15 DVL-DeepONet      

> (a) Trajectory 2 (b) Trajectory 3 (c) Trajectory 4
> (d) Trajectory 5 (e) Trajectory 9 (f) Trajectory 10
> Figure 6: GT trajectories used as unseen test missions in the three-fold cross-validation study.

## 5. Conclusion 

Existing DVL-based velocity estimation meth-ods either rely on model-based LS estimators or employ purely data-driven models. Moreover, the model-based algorithms become unreliable under beam outages and rank-deficient measure-ment configurations, and data-driven models are black-box in nature and do not explicitly enforce the physical relationship between DVL beam measurements and AUV velocity. To address these limitations, this paper proposed DVL-DeepONet, a physics-guided operator-learning framework for velocity estimation of AUV. The proposed method learns a nonlinear mapping from inertial/DVL observations to vehicle velocity and incorporates the DVL observation model as a physics-based consistency constraint during training. Unlike conventional LS reconstruction, the framework does not require direct inversion of the beam geometry matrix and therefore remains applicable even in beam outrages scenarios. Furthermore, the integration of physical constraints improves interpretability and preserves consistency between the predicted velocity vector and the measured DVL beams. As a result, DVL-DeepONet provides robust velocity estimation under noisy measurements, partial beam availability, and degraded beam conditions. The proposed framework has been evaluated using approximately 10,000 m of real-world AUV experimental data collected during multiple sea trials. Experimental results demonstrated that, DVL-DeepONet-I achieved average performance improvements of approximately 15% under noisy inertial/DVL measurements, DVL-DeepONet-II achieved improvements of about 38% in the DVL-only scenario, and DVL-DeepONet-III gains exceeding 65% under partial measurement avail-ability. Overall, the proposed framework achieves an average improvement of approximately 40% compared with the baseline methods. These results demonstrate that the proposed operator-learning frameworks successfully han-dles multiple practical operational scenarios using a unified architecture. The study further shows that integrating physics constraints within DeepONet architectures improves accuracy, robustness and generalization. Moreover, the results indicate that physically informed operator learning can serve as a viable alternative to purely model-based and purely data-driven approaches for underwater navigation tasks. Nonetheless, several limitations warrant consideration. First, DVL-DeepONet requires a minimum temporal window size of two samples, whereas the model-based LS estimator can operate using only the current measurement. Second, the training stage involves multiple 

> Page 13 of 15 DVL-DeepONet

CNN and MLP components, which require GPU acceleration or higher computational power. However, the trained model remains lightweight during inference and is suitable for real-time deployment on AUVs with limited onboard computational resources. DVL-DeepONet offers a white-box solution for resilient underwater navigation, improving mis-sion safety, and operational effectiveness under degraded sensing conditions. Since the imposed physical constraints originate from the DVL mea-surement process itself and are independent of a particular operating region, the proposed frame-work is expected to generalize more effectively across diverse underwater environments than purely data-driven approaches. Future work will focus on extending the proposed framework to full navigation-state estimation (position, veloc-ity, and orientation) and integrating uncertainty-aware learning strategies. 

## Conflict of Interest Statement 

The authors confirm that they have no conflicts of interest related to this paper. 

## Funding Declaration 

The authors confirm that they did not receive any funding to carry out this work. 

## Data Availability 

The dataset used in this study is publicly avail-able at: https://github.com/ansfl/A-KIT/tree/main .

## Code Availability 

The source code associated with this study is publicly available at: https://github.com/ansfl/DVL -DeepONet .

## CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Arup Kumar Sahoo: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Itzik Klein: Supervision, Methodology, Writing - review & editing. 

## References 

[1] L. Paull, S. Saeedi, M. Seto, H. Li, AUV navigation and localization: A review, IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering 39 (1) (2013) 131–149. [2] Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Liu, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, E. Lyu, W. Chen, Submarine pipeline track-ing technology based on AUVs with forward looking sonar, Applied Ocean Research 122 (2022) 103128. [3] P. Groves, Principles of GNSS, Inertial and Multi-Sensor Integrated Navigation Systems, Artech House, UK, 2013. [4] D. Titterton, J. L. Weston, Strapdown inertial navigation technology, Vol. 17, IET, 2004. [5] S. Wadoo, Autonomous underwater vehicles: modeling, control design and simulation, CRC press, 2017. [6] B. Braginsky, A. Baruch, H. Guterman, Cor-rection of DVL error caused by seafloor gra-dient, IEEE Sensors Journal 20 (19) (2020) 11652–11659. [7] J. L. Farrell, GNSS aided navigation & track-ing: inertially augmented or autonomous, American Literary Press Baltimore, Mary-land, 2007. [8] A. K. Sahoo, I. Klein, PiDR: Physics-informed inertial dead reckoning for autonomous platforms, arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03040 (2026). [9] B. Zhang, D. Ji, S. Liu, X. Zhu, W. Xu, Autonomous underwater vehicle navigation: A review, Ocean Engineering 273 (2023) 113861. [10] D. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Yao, T. Zhang, Y. Zhu, A novel SINS/DVL tightly integrated naviga-tion method for complex environment, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Mea-surement 69 (7) (2019) 5183–5196. [11] D. Engelsman, I. Klein, Information-aided inertial navigation: A review, IEEE Transac-tions on Instrumentation and Measurement 72 (2023) 1–18. [12] S. Cheng, Y. Wang, Q. Zhao, H. Zhu, X. Qu, A robust INS/USBL/DVL integrated naviga-tion method based on adaptive correlation entropy factor graph optimization, Ocean Engineering 356 (2026) 125234. [13] H. Zhang, C. Li, T. Zhang, G. Wang, D. Wang, Novel algorithm for the calibration of DVL in underwater integrated navigation system, Ocean Engineering 353 (2026) 124676. [14] N. Cohen, I. Klein, BeamsNet: A data-driven approach enhancing Doppler velocity log 

> Page 14 of 15 DVL-DeepONet

measurements for autonomous underwater vehicle navigation, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 114 (2022) 105216. [15] G. Damari, I. Klein, ResAlignNet: A data-driven approach for INS/DVL alignment, Ocean Engineering 356 (2026) 125277. [16] M. Batoš, Ð. Nađ, DMIAN: deep learning-based multi-IMU fusion for enhanced ma-rine aided navigation, Control engineering practice 173 (2026) 106991. [17] L. Kang, K. He, J. Zhao, X. Wang, P. Tan, A hybrid-kernel-based adaptive robust Kalman filter for INS/DVL integrated underwater navigation, Ocean Engineering 350 (2026) 124269. [18] H. Mo, H. Yang, Y. Zhang, D. Pan, G. Yang, W. Li, A hybrid physics–data-driven naviga-tion method for AUVs fusing hydrographic information with INS/DVL integration, IEEE Sensors Journal (2026). [19] Z. Yampolsky, I. Klein, DCNet: A data-driven framework for DVL calibration, Ap-plied Ocean Research 158 (2025) 104525. [20] F. Zhang, S. Zhao, L. Li, C. Cao, Under-water DVL optimization network (UDON): A learning-based DVL velocity optimizing method for underwater navigation, Drones 9 (1) (2025) 56. [21] N. Cohen, I. Klein, LiBeamsNet: AUV veloc-ity vector estimation in situations of lim-ited DVL beam measurements, in: OCEANS 2022, Hampton Roads, IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–5. [22] M. Yona, I. Klein, MissBeamNet: Learning missing Doppler velocity log beam measure-ments, Neural Computing and Applications 36 (9) (2024) 4947–4958. [23] Y. Miao, X. Liu, Y. Sun, X. Liu, C. Shen, C. Wang, J. Tang, J. Liu, Physics-guided adaptive UKF for robust AUV integrated navigation under degraded underwater ob-servations, Ocean Engineering 362 (2026) 126542. [24] X. Mu, B. He, X. Zhang, Y. Song, Y. Shen, C. Feng, End-to-end navigation for au-tonomous underwater vehicle with hybrid recurrent neural networks, Ocean Engineer-ing 194 (2019) 106602. [25] N. Cohen, I. Klein, Seamless underwater navigation with limited Doppler velocity log measurements, IEEE Transactions on Intel-ligent Vehicles (2024). [26] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, Learning nonlinear operators via DeepONet based on the universal ap-proximation theorem of operators, Nature Machine Intelligence 3 (2021) 218–229. [27] S. Chakraverty, A. K. Sahoo, D. Mohapatra, Artficial Neural Networks and Type-2 Fuzzy Set: Elements of Soft Computing and Its Applications, Elsevier, 2025. [28] C. Tan, Y. Cai, H. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Lian, Modeling vehicle dynamics with physics-informed deep operator network, Vehicle System Dynamics (2025) 1–29. [29] N. A. Brokloff, Matrix algorithm for Doppler sonar navigation, in: Proceedings of OCEANS’94, Vol. 3, IEEE, 1994, pp. III–378. [30] P. Liu, B. Wang, Z. Deng, M. Fu, INS/DVL/PS tightly coupled underwater navigation method with limited DVL measurements, IEEE Sensors Journal 18 (7) (2018) 2994–3002. [31] A. Shurin, A. Saraev, M. Yona, Y. Gutnik, S. Faber, A. Etzion, I. Klein, The autonomous platforms inertial dataset, IEEE Access 10 (2022) 10191–10201. [32] ECA Group, A18-D AUV: Autonomous Un-derwater Vehicle, https://www.ecagroup.com/en/so lutions/a18-d-auv-autonomous-underwater-vehicle ,accessed: Dec. 2025 (2023). [33] iXblue, PHINS Subsea, https://www.ixblue.c om/store/phins- subsea/ , accessed: Dec. 2025 (2023). [34] Teledyne Marine, Doppler Velocity Logs, http s://www.teledynemarine.com/products/product-lin e/navigation-positioning/{Doppler}-velocity-logs ,accessed: Dec. 2025 (2023).