Title: AUSLUN: A Fixed-Hover UAV–USV System for GNSS-Denied Maritime Search and Navigation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29875v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 01:49:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
> 1

# AUSLUN: A Fixed-Hover UAV–USV System for GNSS-Denied Maritime Search and Navigation 

Siyuan Yang, Zikai Jia, Hailiang Kuang, Xiaoyu He, Qizhi Guo, Yihao Dong ∗ and Shaoming He ∗

Abstract —Global navigation satellite system (GNSS) denial can prevent an unmanned surface vehicle (USV) from both finding a distant vessel and maintaining a globally referenced approach. This paper presents AUSLUN (Automatic UAV Search, Localization, and USV Navigation), a fixed-hover aerial-surface system that uses a coastal unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), which estimates its own pose through visual-inertial odometry (VIO), as a long-range sensing and navigation anchor. The central design shifts sensing motion from UAV translation to a zoom pod and closes the loop through three coupled elements: polygon-aware annular pod scanning, modality-aware bearing-range localization, and target-relative USV guidance with visual-loss recovery. The same gated recursive estimator uses laser range for the non-cooperative target and datalink range for the cooperative USV. Search-planning simulations show that the adaptive yaw bounds reduce scan time and redundant coverage relative to a matched fixed-sector scan, and GPS-referenced field data show that the gated recursive estimator outperforms non-recursive baselines in localization accuracy. An integrated maritime mission further demonstrates the complete search-to-navigation sequence, including a deliberately triggered visual-loss recovery. These results establish the feasibility and operating boundary of fixed-hover UAV assistance for stationary-target approach in coastal GNSS-denied environments. The source code and a video demonstration are publicly available 1.

Index Terms —GNSS-denied navigation, maritime robotics, bearing-range localization, unmanned aerial vehicle, unmanned surface vehicle. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) are increasingly used for maritime surveillance, asset protection, search and rescue, and harbor operations [1], [2]. A demanding part of these missions is long-range target approach: the USV must identify and approach one vessel among surrounding traffic before onboard vision or light detection and ranging (LiDAR) can provide reliable close-range acquisition. The task becomes more difficult when global navigation satellite system (GNSS) 

S. Yang is with the School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: siyuan.yang@bit.edu.cn). Z. Jia is with the School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: 3120215032@bit.edu.cn). H. Kuang is with the School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: cpt.kk@live.com). X. He is with the School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: 3120230048@bit.edu.cn). Q. Guo is with the School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: qizhi.guo@bit.edu.cn). Y. Dong is with the Khalifa University Center for Autonomous Robotic Systems (KUCARS), Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi 127788, United Arab Emirates (e-mail: yihao.dong@ku.ac.ae). S. He is with the School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: shaoming.he@bit.edu.cn). 

∗Corresponding authors. 

> 1

Code: https://github.com/xirhxq/pod search; Video demonstration: https: //youtu.be/S-5RkJs35JI 

Fig. 1. Fixed-hover UAV assistance for GNSS-denied maritime target approach. The UAV remains over a coastal VIO-feasible location, searches the water region by pod motion, uses laser and datalink ranges for the non-cooperative target and cooperative USV, respectively, and transmits target-relative guidance to the USV. 

measurements are degraded by blockage, multipath, interfer-ence, or spoofing [3]. The resulting problem is simultaneously perceptual and navigational: the target is outside the USV sensing horizon, while the USV lacks a stable global reference for the approach. This paper studies the fixed-hover aerial-assistance configuration in Fig. 1. The key systems insight is to retain the UAV over a low-altitude coastal location where shoreline features support VIO [4], [5], and to transfer the required sensing motion to a pitch-yaw-zoom pod. The fixed hover point then acts as a persistent reference for long-range bearing-range measurements. This ar-rangement differs from conventional coverage planning, which primarily moves the vehicle through the search region [6], [7], and from visual servoing, which usually treats visibility as a constraint on a single tracking task [8]–[11]. Here, pod search, non-cooperative target localization, cooperative USV localization, guidance, and recovery must operate as one closed mechatronic loop. Three couplings make this loop nontrivial. First, a fixed viewpoint must cover a polygonal water region using only pod pitch, yaw, and field of view (FOV), while maintaining sufficient apparent target size and view overlap. Second, the two vessels share the same bearing geometry but not the same range source: the target is non-cooperative and requires visual alignment before laser ranging, whereas the USV supplies a quantized datalink range. Third, asynchronous sensing and 

> arXiv:2606.29875v1 [cs.RO] 29 Jun 2026 2

intermittent visual tracking must be converted into continuous target-relative guidance without accepting invalid bearing-range pairs. These couplings are not resolved by a detector, coverage planner, relative-localization estimator, or guidance law in isolation. We therefore develop AUSLUN (Automatic UAV Search, Localization, and USV Navigation), a supervisory fixed-hover UAV–USV system. A polygon-to-annular planner converts the mission region into FOV-aware pod sweeps with adaptive yaw bounds. A gated recursive estimator switches the range modal-ity according to vessel cooperation while retaining a common bearing-range state model. The resulting target and USV states are converted into relative guidance, with separate transitions for prolonged target loss, local USV reacquisition, and close-range LiDAR handoff. The framework was deployed during the Mohamed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge (MBZIRC) 2023 [12] and evaluated using search-planning simulations, an integrated Yas Island mission, a deliberately activated recovery interval, and a Global Positioning System (GPS)-referenced localization segment. The main contributions of this work are as follows. 1) Fixed-hover search formulation and pod planner: We formulate maritime coverage under a VIO-constrained fixed UAV position and generate multi-ring pod scans whose pitch, FOV, and polygon-dependent yaw bounds jointly enforce detectability and overlap requirements. Relative to a matched fixed-sector scan, the planner reduces planned search time by 10.9–55.6% across three region geometries. 2) Modality-aware bearing-range localization: We develop a gated estimation architecture that uses a common ves-sel state model with laser range for the non-cooperative target and datalink range for the cooperative USV. The gating logic explicitly couples visual confidence, pod settling, and asynchronous range validity; the field segment yields 11 .4 m mean error and 16 .0 m 95th-percentile error. 3) Field-verified aerial-surface supervisory loop: We inte-grate search, localization, target-relative guidance, local visual-loss recovery, and USV LiDAR handoff in one UAV-side state machine. Maritime field data demon-strate the complete sequence and delineate its operating boundary for stationary targets, coastal line of sight, and a VIO-feasible hover point. The remainder of the paper positions AUSLUN relative to coverage, cooperative localization, and maritime perception; defines the constrained aerial-surface problem; describes the planning, estimation, and supervisory algorithms; and evalu-ates the resulting system in simulation and field experiments. II. R ELATED WORK 

The proposed system lies at the intersection of sensor-aware coverage, bearing-range localization, and aerial-surface cooperation. The relevant distinction is therefore not whether each component has appeared before, but whether prior work closes the same perception-estimation-guidance loop under a fixed coastal viewpoint. 

A. Sensor-Aware Coverage and Visual Servoing 

Coverage planning has been studied for ground, marine, and aerial robots [13], including sensor-driven underwater inspection, active simultaneous localization and mapping, camera-footprint-aware aerial coverage, zoom-aware planning, and integrated gimbal guidance [6], [7], [14]–[16]. Maritime search formulations additionally address area allocation, ve-hicle routing, and cooperative target localization [17]–[19]. These methods predominantly optimize vehicle trajectories or treat the gimbal as a visibility constraint. Recent visual-servoing studies improve quadrotor tracking from robocentric or perception-aware formulations [10], [11], but do not convert an arbitrary water polygon into a detectability-constrained scan from a fixed coastal hover point. AUSLUN instead treats pod pitch, yaw, and zoom as the search actions and adapts each annular sweep to the intersection between the scan ring and the mission polygon. 

B. GNSS-Denied Localization and Aerial-Surface Coopera-tion 

GNSS-resilient marine navigation has used VIO, marine-radar SLAM, LiDAR-assisted fusion, and vision-based dock-ing [20]–[23]. More generally, range-based relative local-ization and multisource navigation fusion provide rigorous tools for cooperative localization under uncertain measure-ments or GNSS interference [3], [24]. These approaches are complementary to, but structurally different from, the present problem: the distant target is non-cooperative, the USV is cooperative, and the two objects therefore provide different range modalities. UAV–USV studies have considered coordinated trajectory tracking, aerial estimation of rescue-USV pose, cooperative search and rescue, and dynamics-aware joint planning [25]– [28]. Their primary focus is platform motion or cooperative-vehicle estimation. AUSLUN uses the UAV as a fixed nav-igation anchor and couples laser-assisted target localization, datalink-assisted USV localization, and target-relative com-mand transmission in the same online sequence. 

C. Maritime Perception and Visual-Loss Handling 

Maritime UAV perception includes stabilized geolocation, vision-range tracking, onboard detection-tracking-localization, prioritized vessel detection, and floating-object tracking [29]– [33]. Visual servoing with explicit visibility constraints [8], [9] and recent continuous image-based servoing under signal loss [34] show the importance of preserving or recovering image measurements. In AUSLUN, recovery is not claimed as a standalone visual-servoing law. It is a supervisory mechanism that distinguishes between target loss during global search and USV loss during guidance: the former resumes the remaining search plan, whereas the latter expands the FOV and performs a local spiral around the last valid direction. In summary, the paper’s novelty is the constrained system architecture and its field-verified coupling: fixed-hover pod coverage, cooperation-dependent range sensing, measurement-gated estimation, relative guidance, and task-specific loss transitions. 3

III. S YSTEM CONFIGURATION AND MEASUREMENT 

MODEL 

Building on the scenario introduced in Section I, this section defines the coordinate frames, platform configuration, and sensing and communication models used in the problem formulation. Three coordinate frames are used throughout this paper. The local navigation frame I is a north-east-up frame with origin at the UAV takeoff point and the water surface represented by z = 0 . The UAV body frame B is a forward-left-up frame attached to the UAV, and the camera frame C is a forward-left-up frame centered at the camera. Let pu = [ xu, y u, h u]T

denote the UAV position in I, where hu > 0 is the hover altitude. Let RIB denote the rotation from body frame to inertial frame, and let RBC denote the rotation from camera frame to body frame. These matrices are constructed from the UAV attitude and the pod angles. The system contains two cooperative platforms and one sta-tionary non-cooperative target. The UAV carries a downward-facing VIO module, a two-axis gimbaled pod, a laser rang-ing module, an onboard computer, and a datalink. The pod supports independent pitch and yaw control and continuous optical zoom with horizontal field of view (HFOV) from 2.36 ◦

to 63 .49 ◦. Let Sc denote the set of coastal hover positions where visual features are visible to the VIO system, and let 

hVIO denote the maximum altitude for reliable low-altitude VIO. The UAV position satisfies 

pu = [ xu, y u, h u]T ,

s.t. (xu, y u) ∈ S c, hu ∈ [hmin , h VIO ]. (1) In the field implementation, the UAV operates from a low-altitude fixed hover where coastal features remain visible to the VIO system and pu anchors the bearing-range conversion and target-relative navigation commands [4], [5]. The USV is a cooperative platform. It receives navigation commands from the UAV and carries a datalink transponder that provides range measurements over a nominal 4 km link. This provides the practical basis for using datalink range during long-range USV navigation assistance. In the GNSS-denied phase, the USV relies on the UAV-estimated position and relative navigation vector. The target vessel is stationary and non-cooperative. It does not provide communication, range, or pose information. Its position must be estimated from image-based bearing measurements and laser ranging measurements collected after the pod is aligned with the vessel. Two bearing-range measurement modes are used. For the non-cooperative target vessel, the UAV forms the measurement 

zt = [ ρl, α t, ϵ t, h u]T , (2) where ρl is the laser ranging measurement, αt is the camera azimuth (positive to the left) and ϵt is the camera elevation angle (positive downward), and hu is the UAV operating altitude. The range component is used only after the pod has been aligned with the target and a valid laser ranging measurement is available. This alignment introduces a short dwell period, but it is necessary because the target vessel does not cooperate with the localization system. For the cooperative USV, the UAV forms the measurement 

zv = [ ρv , α v , ϵ v , h u]T , (3) where ρv is the datalink range to the USV. The same bearing-range geometry is used for both vessels, while the range input depends on whether the vessel is cooperative. IV. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

Based on the system configuration in Section III, the ob-jective is to design an online fixed-hover UAV policy for target search, target and USV localization, and USV navigation assistance in a system with a cooperative USV and a non-cooperative target vessel. Given the search region Ω, the VIO-feasible fixed UAV position pu, the pod actuation limits, a target image template, the USV dock region, and the available laser and datalink range measurements, the policy must gener-ate pod commands, form vessel measurements, estimate vessel positions, and publish USV navigation commands until the USV reaches the close-range acquisition region. The control command of the pod is 

up(t) = [ θp(t), θ y (t), ϕ h(t)] T , (4) where θp is pitch (positive downward), θy is yaw (positive to the left), and ϕh is horizontal FOV. The coupled policy is decomposed below into search, target localization, USV local-ization and navigation, and visual-loss recovery subproblems. 

A. Pod-Based Search Problem 

Given the search region Ω, the VIO-feasible fixed UAV position pu, and the admissible pod command set Ap defined by the pod pitch, yaw, and FOV limits, the search problem is to generate a finite pod command sequence 

U = {u1

> p

, u2

> p

, . . . , uNp } (5) that covers Ω while avoiding unnecessary scans outside the polygonal search region. Let Fi = F(uip; pu). The coverage requirement is expressed as 

Ω ⊆

> N

[

> i=1

Fi,

uip ∈ A p, i = 1 , . . . , N, 

(6) where F(·) is the camera footprint on the water plane. The multi-ring annular construction and overlap rule are method choices introduced in Section V. 

B. Non-Cooperative Target Localization Problem 

After a candidate target vessel is detected, the system must estimate its position pt ∈ R3 from the target measurement zt

in (2). The range component is obtained only after visual track-ing, pod alignment, and a returned laser ranging measurement. Let ct denote the visual confidence, (ut, v t) the normalized target point in the image ( ut positive to the right, vt positive downward), τc the minimum visual-confidence threshold, τa

the normalized image-center alignment tolerance, and χp, χy ,and χϕ denote whether the pitch, yaw, and FOV commands 4

have reached their targets. Let al(t) ∈ { 0, 1} indicate whether a laser ranging measurement is returned for the currently tracked vessel. The target measurement condition is 

Ct(t) : ct ≥ τc,

q

u2 

> t

+ v2 

> t

≤ τa,χpχy χϕ = 1 , al(t) = 1 .

(7) This condition captures the implemented dwell-and-ranging procedure: the pod first tracks the visual target, then waits until the pod attitude and zoom commands are reached, and only then uses the laser ranging measurement for target localization. The target localization problem is to estimate 

ˆpt = ft(zt, pu, R IB , R BC ), (8) using only frames that contain a laser ranging measurement and sufficient visual confidence. 

C. USV Localization and Navigation Problem 

The cooperative USV position is denoted by pv ∈ R3.Given the measurement zv in (3), the UAV estimates the USV position as 

ˆpv = fv (zv , pu, R IB , R BC ). (9) Let cv denote the visual confidence for the cooperative USV, let (uv , v v ) denote the normalized USV tracking point, and let 

ad(t) ∈ { 0, 1} indicate whether a datalink range is received. The USV measurement condition is 

Cv (t) : cv ≥ τc, pu2 

> v

+ v2 

> v

≤ τa,ad(t) = 1 . (10) The same confidence and alignment thresholds are used as in (7). Unlike the non-cooperative target condition in (7), (10) pairs the visual bearing with the datalink range for cooperative-USV localization and navigation. Once ˆpt and ˆpv

are available, the relative navigation vector is 

nv→t = [ nx, n y , n z ]T = ˆ pt − ˆpv , (11) and the desired heading command is 

ψn = atan2( ny , n x). (12) The UAV sends nv→t and ψn to the USV through the datalink. The navigation stage is complete when the cooperative USV reports a local LiDAR acquisition signal, after which the USV takes over the final approach. 

D. Recovery Problem 

When visual tracking is lost, the system must reacquire the target vessel or the USV without restarting the full search over 

Ω. Given the last valid pod command up, 0 and the last known visual target identity, the recovery problem is to generate a local scan command that searches the neighborhood of the last visual direction without restarting a full-area search. 

E. System-Level Problem Summary 

The complete policy must therefore generate a scan se-quence U, estimate the target and USV through ft and fv ,publish target-relative guidance, and select the appropriate recovery transition. Throughout the mission, the UAV must re-main inside the VIO-feasible hover set, the planned footprints must cover Ω under the adopted footprint model, and estimator updates are permitted only when Ct or Cv is satisfied. The mission terminates when the USV reports close-range LiDAR acquisition. V. P ROPOSED METHOD 

Fig. 2 organizes AUSLUN as a closed perception-estimation-guidance loop. The fixed UAV pose and pod geom-etry define the search action space; visual, laser, and datalink channels enter a modality-aware estimator; and a supervisory state machine determines whether the system searches, lo-calizes, guides, recovers, or hands control to onboard USV sensing. The method receives the search polygon, fixed UAV pose, pod limits, target template, USV dock region, and asynchronous measurements. It returns the target and USV state estimates and the corresponding target-relative USV command. 

A. FOV-Aware Pod Search 

Because the UAV position is fixed by the VIO constraint, the search planner generates pod commands rather than UAV waypoints. It models the camera footprint as a function of UAV altitude, camera pitch, and FOV. For a given camera pitch θp,the distance from the UAV to the ground footprint center is 

r(θp) = hu

tan( θp) . (13) The horizontal extent of the footprint at this distance is 

Lh(θp) = 2 r(θp) tan 

 ϕh(θp)2



, (14) and the vertical extent is 

Lv (θp) = 2 r(θp) tan 

 ϕv

2



. (15) Here ϕv is obtained from the horizontal FOV and the image as-pect ratio. The water surface is approximated as locally planar, and these footprint dimensions are planning approximations for overlap-controlled scan rings; θp is the positive downward pitch angle from the horizontal line of sight. The planner uses three search-design parameters to connect geometric coverage with visual detectability. The apparent-size parameter 

γw specifies the minimum fraction of the image width that a vessel with nominal length Ltar should occupy. Accordingly, the horizontal footprint is selected to satisfy 

Ltar 

Lh(θp) ≥ γw, Lh(θp) ≤ Ltar 

γw

. (16) The planner chooses the widest admissible FOV that satisfies (16) within the pod FOV limits. The sweep-time parameter Ts

specifies how long a target should remain inside one horizontal 5 

> Fig. 2. Closed-loop architecture of AUSLUN. (a) A coastal fixed-hover UAV transfers sensing motion to the pitch-yaw-zoom pod and uses different range channels for the non-cooperative target and cooperative USV. (b) Measurement gating feeds a common bearing-range recursive estimator, whose target and USV outputs generate relative guidance. (c) The supervisory state machine separates global target search, laser-gated target localization, datalink-assisted USV tracking, local visual-loss recovery, and close-range LiDAR handoff.

FOV during a yaw sweep. The overlap parameter η specifies the required vertical overlap between adjacent pitch rings, so that multi-ring scanning does not leave uncovered strips between neighboring rings. To instantiate the generic coverage problem in Section IV, the search area is divided into annular regions centered at the UAV position. The rings are ordered from far to near, 

r1 ≥ r2 ≥ · · · ≥ rN , (17) so that the pod first scans the farthest visible annulus and then moves inward. For the i-th ring, the pitch angle is computed from its center range ri:

θ(i) 

> p

= arctan 

 hu

ri



. (18) Adjacent rings satisfy the overlap constraint 

ri − ri+1 ≤ 1 − η

2



Lv (θ(i) 

> p

) + Lv (θ(i+1)  

> p

)



,i = 1 , . . . , N − 1.

(19) For each ring, the yaw bounds are obtained by intersecting the search polygon with the circular arc at range ri:

θy ∈ [θ(i)

> y, min

, θ (i)

> y, max

]. (20) The horizontal yaw rate for the i-th ring is 

ω(i) 

> y

= ϕh(θ(i) 

> p

)

Ts

, (21) and the resulting search time is approximated by 

Tsearch =

> N

X

> i=1

|θ(i) 

> y, max

− θ(i)

> y, min

|

ϕh(θ(i) 

> p

) Ts, (22) excluding the short repositioning commands used to move the pod to the start of each ring. 

B. Vision-Ranging Localization 

After a candidate target vessel is detected, the pod enters a tracking-and-ranging mode. The visual detector provides a target identity, a confidence or template-matching score, and a bounding box. The controller selects a tracking point inside the box and keeps it near the image center before using range measurements. Let (ut, v t) ∈ [−1, 1] 2 denote the normalized tracking point in the camera image. The target bearing angles are computed as 



αt = − arctan 



ut tan ϕh

2



,ϵt = arctan 



vt tan ϕv

2



.

(23) The pod controller updates its pitch, yaw, and zoom commands until the target is close to the image center. In the implemented controller, the desired pod command is 

θ⋆p = θp + ϵt, θ⋆y = θy + αt, (24) and the zoom is adjusted according to the target-box width so that the target remains within a useful image scale. When the box width falls below the lower bound in Table I, the controller reduces the horizontal FOV; when it exceeds the upper bound, the controller increases the horizontal FOV. The alignment flags from the pod controller are used as a dwell condition, so that laser ranging is used only after the optical axis and the target point are sufficiently aligned. In the field 6

implementation, this centering requirement is enforced by the tracking command and pod-settling flags, rather than by a separate hard-coded image-coordinate threshold. Laser ranging is then enabled, and the frame is used for localization only when a laser ranging measurement is obtained and the target remains visible. Missing laser ranging measurements, missing detections, or incomplete pod alignment cause the frame to be treated as prediction-only in the estimator rather than as a localization update. If visual tracking of the target vessel is lost for a timeout period, the controller falls back to the remaining search sequence instead of accepting a bearing-only target position. The target position in the camera frame is 

pCt =



1tan αt

− tan ϵt

 ρl

p1 + tan 2 αt + tan 2 ϵt

. (25) This expression converts the measured range and bearing angles into a camera-frame position vector. The corresponding inertial position is 

ˆpt = pu + RIB RBC pCt . (26) The estimator below smooths this bearing-range estimate when multiple measurement frames are available. The same bearing-range form is used for both target and USV localization. For a tracked object j ∈ { t, v }, the mea-surement is 

zj = [ ρj , α j , ϵ j , h u]T . (27) For the target vessel, ρj = ρl. For the USV, ρj = ρv is the datalink range. The datalink value is used as a quantized cooperative range input, not as a high-resolution ranging sensor; R = diag( σ2

> ρ

, σ 2

> α

, σ 2 

> ϵ

, σ 2

> h

) weights the range, azimuth, elevation, and altitude measurement noise. The estimator state is 

xj = [ xj , y j , z j , v x,j , v y,j , v z,j ]T . (28) A nearly constant velocity model is used: 

xj,k +1 = Fkxj,k + wk, (29) where Fk is the discrete constant-velocity transition matrix and wk ∼ N (0, Q). The nonlinear measurement model is 

g(xj ) = 

px2 

> c

+ y2 

> c

+ z2

> c

atan2( yc, x c)

− atan2( zc, x c)

hu

 , (30) where [xc, y c, z c]T = pCj . The fourth component reduces to the known altitude hu under the planar-water assumption zj ≈

0. The camera-frame position is obtained from the inertial-frame state by 

pCj = RCB RBI (xj, 1:3 − pu). (31) Here RCB = ( RBC )T and RBI = ( RIB )T . The Jacobian Hk =

∂g/∂ xj |¯xj,k linearizes this measurement model around the predicted state. The recursive prediction and update are 

¯xj,k = Fkxj,k −1,

¯Pj,k = FkPj,k −1F Tk + Q, (32) and Kk = ¯Pj,k HTk (Hk ¯Pj,k HTk + R)−1,

xj,k = ¯ xj,k + Kk(zj,k − g( ¯ xj,k )) ,

Pj,k = ( I − KkHk) ¯Pj,k .

(33) 

C. Datalink-Assisted Navigation 

After the target position and USV position are estimated, the UAV computes the relative navigation vector using (11). The heading command in (12) is transmitted to the USV together with the relative position. This separates non-cooperative target localization from cooperative USV navigation while retaining a common bearing-range model. In navigation mode, the datalink range is used with the current visual bearing. This preserves the cooperative USV localization chain without introducing a second USV ranging mode. 

D. Visual-Loss Recovery 

Visual tracking loss is detected when no valid detection is received for a timeout period Tloss or the detection confidence falls below the threshold τc. The system stores the last valid pod command (θp, 0, θ y, 0, ϕ h, 0) and expands the horizontal FOV as 

ϕ′ 

> h

= min( ϕmax  

> h

, κϕ h, 0), (34) where κ is the FOV expansion factor. If the target is not recov-ered through FOV expansion, the pod performs a sinusoidal spiral scan: 

θp(t) = θp, 0 + ˙Apt sin 

 2πt Tscan 



,θy (t) = θy, 0 + ˙Ay t cos 

 2πt Tscan 



.

(35) Here ˙Ap and ˙Ay are pitch and yaw envelope expansion rates. The scan expands around the last known visual direction and returns to the previous tracking or navigation state af-ter the target vessel or USV is reacquired. For the target-localization stage, a prolonged loss of visual detections causes the controller to resume the remaining search sequence. For the USV-navigation stage, the controller enters the local visual-loss recovery state because the USV identity and approximate direction are already known. Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete online workflow. VI. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 

The evaluation follows the paper’s claim hierarchy. First, deterministic planning simulations test whether polygon-dependent yaw bounds reduce scan time and redundant cover-age under matched sensing constraints. Second, an integrated Yas Island mission tests whether the complete state sequence can progress from search to target localization, USV guidance, recovery, and close-range handoff. Third, a deliberately acti-vated interruption tests the recovery-to-navigation transition. Finally, a GPS-referenced field segment tests localization ac-curacy against non-recursive baselines. Because the available field record contains one integrated mission and one delib-erately activated recovery interval, the corresponding results establish feasibility and observed behavior, not a statistical reliability rate. 7

Algorithm 1 UAV-Assisted Search, Target Localization, and USV Navigation 

Input: Ω, pu, FOV limits, target template, USV dock region 

Output: ˆpt, ˆpv , nv→t, ψn

Generate FOV-aware pod scan sequence U

for each command uip ∈ U do 

Execute pod search command uip

if candidate target vessel is detected then 

Track the target and align the pod with the target point Enable laser ranging and use zt only when Ct holds Estimate ˆpt from zt

if target is confirmed then 

Reorient the pod toward the USV dock region 

while USV local LiDAR acquisition signal is not received do 

Track the USV and use zv when Cv holds Estimate ˆpv

Compute nv→t and ψn

Publish the navigation command to the USV 

if visual tracking is lost then 

Execute FOV expansion and sinusoidal spiral recovery 

end if end while 

BREAK 

end if end if end for 

A. Search-Planning Simulation 1) Setup: The search-planning simulation uses the system configuration in Section III and the search problem defined in Section IV. The field-polygon case uses the same polygonal search region as the Yas Island deployment and the same design and implementation parameters as the field system, summarized in Table I; the baseline is a fixed-sector angular raster scan with matched pitch rings and dwell time. The evaluation metrics are search time, coverage com-pleteness, and redundant coverage. The coverage planner is compared with a fixed-sector angular raster scan. Localization and recovery are evaluated with field data in the following subsections. 

2) Results: Fig. 3 shows three representative cases gen-erated from the same fixed-hover UAV position and search-design parameters. The yaw bounds are computed from the intersection between each annular ring and the polygonal mission region, so the pod does not execute a full-sector scan when only a subset of the sector belongs to the search area. Table II summarizes the planning results. The three cases require one to three pitch rings depending on their radial span from the fixed-hover UAV position. Under the planner’s footprint model, all three cases cover the polygonal region with the prescribed vertical-overlap requirement. The fixed-sector angular raster baseline follows the conventional raster or lawnmower idea [13] but uses the same fixed-hover viewpoint, pitch rings, zoom schedule, overlap requirement, and in-view time while sweeping each full yaw sector. Compared with this 

TABLE I DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION PARAMETERS .                                                            

> Parameter Symbol Value Search polygon vertices nΩ4
> Search polygon area |Ω|2.45 km 2
> Search bounding box bΩ1.53 km ×1.78 km
> Fixed-hover UAV position pu(0 ,0,7.5) m
> Search yaw span ∆θy180 ◦
> Image aspect ratio aimg 16 : 9
> Nominal target length Ltar 10 m
> Minimum target width fraction
> γw0.1
> Pitch-ring overlap η0.1
> In-view time Ts4 s
> Target box width fraction wt0.10 –0.50
> USV box width fraction wv0.08 –0.12
> Visual-confidence threshold
> τc0.9
> Image-center alignment tolerance
> τa0.05
> Range update rate fρl, f ρv 1 Hz
> Datalink range quantization
> qρv 10 m
> Measurement std. dev. σρ, σ α, σ ϵ, σ h(1.0 m ,0.71 ◦,0.71 ◦,2.24 m )Process acceleration σa1.0 m s −2
> Target visual-loss timeout Tloss ,t 20 s
> USV visual-loss timeout Tloss ,v 5 s
> FOV expansion factor κ1.5
> Recovery scan period Tscan 15 s
> Pitch envelope rate ˙Ap0.01 ◦s−1
> Yaw envelope rate ˙Ay0.033 ◦s−1
> Recovery rate limit ˙θmax 10 ◦s−1

TABLE II SEARCH -PLANNING RESULTS UNDER MATCHED PITCH RINGS , FOV 

> SCHEDULE

, OVERLAP , AND DWELL TIME . S CAN TIME REPORTS 

AUSLUN/ FIXED -SECTOR BASELINE .                       

> Case Area Rings Scan time Time red. Area red. (km 2)A/base ( s)(%) (%) Yas Island field polygon 2.45 2355.2/439.9 19.3 28.3 Coastal corridor 0.27 163.7/143.3 55.6 69.4 Offshore bay 5.12 3591.0/663.5 10.9 13.3

baseline, the adaptive yaw bounds reduce the planned scan time by 10.9%–55.6% and reduce the redundant scanned area in all three regions. 

B. Field Experiments 1) Setup: The field UAV is a DJI Matrice 300 equipped with a two-axis zoom pod, a laser ranging module, an onboard computer, a datalink, and the downward-facing VIO module described in Section III. The UAV runs the search, tracking, localization, navigation, and recovery modules onboard under Robot Operating System Noetic. The cooperative USV is based on the Drone Carrier integrated USV platform reported in [35]; in the present experiments, it receives target-relative navigation commands from the UAV and uses its onboard LiDAR for close-range acquisition. 

2) Integrated Field Mission: The integrated field mission was conducted during the final Yas Island maritime deploy-ment. The logged data from this run support system-level evaluation of phase transitions and target-relative navigation behavior. Figs. 4 and 5 summarize the onboard recognition sequence and the synchronized pod and datalink histories. The target was detected during the first far-range sweep; because 80 500 1000 1500  

> x(m)
> −1000
> −750
> −500
> −250
> 0
> 250
> 500
> 750
> y (m)
> UAV
> ring 1
> ring 2

(a) Yas Island field polygon. 0 200 400 600 800   

> x(m)
> −200
> 0
> 200
> y (m)
> UAV
> ring 1

(b) Coastal corridor. 0 1000 2000 3000   

> x(m)
> −1500
> −1000
> −500
> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> y (m)
> UAV
> ring 1
> ring 2
> ring 3

(c) Offshore bay.  

> Fig. 3. FOV-aware pod-search plans for three polygonal regions. Each panel shows the combined scan plan and per-ring decomposition; colored annular sectors are planned footprints, and red arcs are active yaw sweeps.

(a) Search sweep. (b) Target entering. (c) Target confirmation. (d) USV acquisition. 

(e) Navigation update. (f) Approach. (g) Recovery scan. (h) Reacquisition. 

> Fig. 4. Representative onboard frames from the Yas Island mission. The sequence shows the far-range search sweep, target entry and confirmation, cooperative-USV acquisition, navigation updates, the deliberately activated recovery interval, and visual reacquisition.

of this early detection, the remaining planned near-range scan was not executed, and the system automatically switched from search to tracking. The mission transitions from search to tracking, then to target confirmation, and then to navigation. During the avail-able navigation window, the datalink range increases as the USV moves away from the UAV, whereas the estimated USV-to-target distance decreased from 1388 .3 m to 213 .8 m . The minimum UAV-side estimated target-relative distance over the available data is 167 .6 m . These online outputs characterize integrated navigation behavior from UAV-side estimates. 

3) Visual-Loss Recovery: Fig. 6 shows one deliberately triggered visual-loss recovery interval in the mission data. In this active recovery test, the USV visual detection was intentionally allowed to remain unavailable long enough to trigger local visual-loss recovery. At the beginning of recovery, the controller stores the last valid pod direction, expands the horizontal FOV, and performs a local pitch-yaw scan around that direction. After reacquisition, the system returns to navigation and resumes target-relative navigation updates, showing the intended recovery-to-navigation transition. 

4) GPS-Referenced Localization Analysis: The localization experiment uses a separate GPS-referenced Yas-region seg-ment to isolate estimator behavior from the integrated mission transitions. AUSLUN is compared with two controlled non-recursive baselines using exactly the same synchronized visual bearing, datalink range, UAV pose, and reference trajectory. The direct bearing-range baseline applies instantaneous geo-metric conversion, whereas the mean-filter baseline averages these direct estimates. The comparison therefore tests temporal consistency under matched measurements; it is not a cross-platform comparison with radar, LiDAR, or onboard VIO systems, whose sensing ranges and deployment conditions differ [20]–[23]. The AUSLUN estimator is initialized by the first valid bearing-range measurement and then applies the six-state recursive model in (28)–(33). Fig. 7 summarizes the estimator error and planar trajectory over the aligned field-data window. Its mean error is 11 .4 m and its 95th-percentile error is 16 .0 m , whereas the direct bearing-range and mean-filter baselines have mean errors of 27 .5 m and 50 .1 m , respectively. Thus, the recursive estimator reduces mean error by 58.5% relative to direct conversion over this segment. VII. D ISCUSSION 

The experiments support the central systems claim: a coastal fixed-hover UAV can extend the sensing horizon of a GNSS-9−20 0 20 40  

> θy(deg)
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> θp (deg)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> t − ts (s)

(a) Pod pointing trajectory. −25          

> 0
> 25
> θy (deg)
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> t−ts(s)
> 0.0
> 2.5
> 5.0
> θp (deg)

(b) Yaw and pitch histories. 0 200 400 600 800 1000     

> t−ts(s)
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> ϕh (deg)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> 1200
> 1400
> ρv (m)

(c) HFOV and datalink range. 

Fig. 5. Synchronized pod and datalink histories during the integrated mission. Background bands denote the supervisory states, linking pod motion and FOV changes to search, tracking, guidance, and recovery. −34 −33 −32 −31 −30 −29    

> θy(deg)
> −0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> θp (deg)
> Command Measured Entry

Fig. 6. Deliberately activated visual-loss recovery interval in pitch-yaw space. The commanded expanding spiral and measured pod response are shown until reacquisition; this single interval demonstrates the implemented transition but does not estimate a recovery probability. 0 20 40 60 80 100  

> t(s)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> ‖̂ pt − pref
> t ‖ (m)
> Ours
> Direct bearing-range
> Mean filter

(a) Position error. −250 −200 −150 −100  

> xt(m)
> −40
> −20
> 0
> 20
> 40
> yt (m)
> Reference
> Direct bearing-range
> Ours
> Mean filter

(b) Planar trajectory. 

Fig. 7. GPS-referenced field localization under a common synchronized measurement sequence. (a) Position errors of AUSLUN, direct bearing-range conversion, and a mean filter; the direct-conversion curve is clipped at its 99th percentile for display only. (b) Corresponding planar trajectories. AUSLUN achieves 11 .4 m mean error and 16 .0 m 95th-percentile error. 

denied USV without requiring the UAV to execute an over-water coverage trajectory. The benefit comes from separating platform stabilization from sensing motion. VIO maintains the aerial reference near the shoreline, whereas the pod supplies the angular motion and zoom required for search and tracking. The planning results further show that polygon-dependent yaw bounds matter most for narrow or irregular regions; the improvement is smaller when the mission region already occupies most of the admissible sector. The same fixed viewpoint also defines the main limitations. Coverage completeness is established under the planar foot-print and nominal target-size model, not through an empirical probability-of-detection study. Localization accuracy depends on VIO pose quality, pod calibration, visual centering, range availability, and the 10 m datalink quantization used in the field system. The present comparison isolates recursive estimation from two non-recursive alternatives, but does not determine which individual error source dominates. A calibration study, range-quantization ablation, and uncertainty propagation from localization to guidance would strengthen the causal evidence for the estimator design. Finally, the integrated mission demonstrates supervisory feasibility rather than repeatability. One deliberate interrup-tion was sufficient to verify the implemented transition from guidance to local recovery and back, but repeated trials with controlled loss duration, sea state, target motion, and back-ground traffic are required to estimate recovery probability and mission completion rate. The current architecture is therefore best interpreted as a field-validated baseline for stationary-target coastal approach, not as a general solution to moving-target pursuit or collision-aware maritime autonomy. VIII. C ONCLUSION 

This paper presented AUSLUN, a fixed-hover UAV–USV system that transfers search motion to a zoom pod and closes the loop from maritime perception to target-relative guidance. The polygon-aware planner reduced planned scan time by 10.9–55.6% relative to a matched fixed-sector scan, and the modality-aware recursive estimator achieved 11 .4 m 

mean error in the GPS-referenced field segment. The inte-grated mission further demonstrated automatic transitions from far-range search to target localization, USV guidance, local 10 

visual-loss recovery, and navigation resumption. These results support fixed-hover aerial assistance as a practical operating mode when a coastal VIO-feasible viewpoint is available. The demonstrated scope remains bounded. The target was stationary, the UAV maintained line of sight from one coastal viewpoint, the integrated mission and recovery evidence were single-run demonstrations, and collision avoidance, final dock-ing, and close-range perception remained onboard USV func-tions. Future work should evaluate repeated recovery trials, moving targets, uncertainty-aware guidance, and active or multi-UAV viewpoint selection. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by Beijing Institute of Technology through the National Key Research and Development Program under Grant No. 2022YFE0204400. REFERENCES [1] P. Mahacek, C. A. Kitts, and I. A. Mas, “Dynamic guarding of marine assets through cluster control of automated surface vessel fleets,” 

IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 65–75, 2012. [2] J. Villa, J. Aaltonen, and K. T. Koskinen, “Path-following with LiDAR-based obstacle avoidance of an unmanned surface vehicle in harbor conditions,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1812–1820, 2020. [3] C. Meng, Q. Hu, S. S. Ge, and D. Li, “Trusted multisource fusion navigation for UAV under GNSS interference and spoofing attacks,” 

IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 4165– 4175, 2025. [4] T. Shan, B. Englot, C. Ratti, and D. Rus, “LVI-SAM: Tightly-coupled LiDAR-visual-inertial odometry via smoothing and mapping,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,2021, pp. 5692–5698. [5] A. Weinstein, A. Cho, and G. Loianno, “Visual inertial odometry swarm: An autonomous swarm of vision-based quadrotors,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1801–1807, 2018. [6] L. Paull, S. Saeedi, M. Seto, and H. Li, “Sensor-driven online coverage planning for autonomous underwater vehicles,” IEEE/ASME Transac-tions on Mechatronics , vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1827–1838, 2013. [7] Y. Chen, S. Huang, and R. Fitch, “Active SLAM for mobile robots with area coverage and obstacle avoidance,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1182–1192, 2020. [8] H. Xie and A. F. Lynch, “Input saturated visual servoing for unmanned aerial vehicles,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 952–960, 2017. [9] D. Zheng, H. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, and W. Chen, “Toward visibility guaranteed visual servoing control of quadrotor UAVs,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1087–1095, 2019. [10] Y. Li, G. Lu, D. He, and F. Zhang, “Robocentric model-based visual ser-voing for quadrotor flights,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics ,vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 2155–2166, 2023. [11] C. Qin, Q. Yu, H. S. H. Go, and H. H.-T. Liu, “Perception-aware image-based visual servoing of aggressive quadrotor UAVs,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 2020–2028, 2023. [12] “Mohamed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge 2023,” 2023, accessed: Jun. 15, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.mbzirc.com [13] E. Galceran and M. Carreras, “A survey on coverage path planning for robotics,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1258– 1276, 2013. [14] S. S. Mansouri, C. Kanellakis, G. Georgoulas, D. Kominiak, T. Gustafs-son, and G. Nikolakopoulos, “2D visual area coverage and path planning coupled with camera footprints,” Control Engineering Practice , vol. 75, pp. 1–16, 2018. [15] N. C. Rios, S. Mondal, and A. Tsourdos, “A simulation framework for zoom-aided coverage path planning with UAV-mounted PTZ cameras,” 

Sensors , vol. 25, no. 17, p. 5220, 2025. [16] S. Papaioannou, P. Kolios, T. Theocharides, C. G. Panayiotou, and M. M. Polycarpou, “Integrated guidance and gimbal control for coverage planning with visibility constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 1276–1291, 2023. [17] B. Ai, M. Jia, H. Xu, J. Xu, Z. Wen, B. Li, and D. Zhang, “Coverage path planning for maritime search and rescue using reinforcement learning,” 

Ocean Engineering , vol. 241, p. 110098, 2021. [18] J. Li, G. Zhang, C. Jiang, and W. Zhang, “A survey of maritime unmanned search system: Theory, applications and future directions,” 

Ocean Engineering , vol. 285, p. 115359, 2023. [19] S. M. Esmailifar and F. Saghafi, “Cooperative localization of marine targets by UAVs,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 87, pp. 23–42, 2017. [20] X. Liu, Z. Hu, Z. Sun, J. Lu, W. Xie, and W. Zhang, “A VIO-based local-ization approach in GPS-denied environments for an unmanned surface vehicle,” in 2023 International Conference on Advanced Robotics and Mechatronics (ICARM) , 2023, pp. 912–917. [21] J. Han, Y. Cho, and J. Kim, “Coastal SLAM with marine radar for USV operation in GPS-restricted situations,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering , vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 300–309, 2019. [22] W. Shen, Z. Yang, C. Yang, and X. Li, “A LiDAR SLAM-assisted fusion positioning method for USVs,” Sensors , vol. 23, no. 3, p. 1558, 2023. [23] Ø. Volden, A. Stahl, and T. I. Fossen, “Vision-based positioning system for auto-docking of unmanned surface vehicles (USVs),” International Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 86– 103, 2022. [24] Y. Wang, M. Lin, X. Xie, Y. Gao, F. Deng, and T. L. Lam, “Asymp-totically efficient estimator for range-based robot relative localization,” 

IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 3525– 3536, 2023. [25] N. Wang and C. K. Ahn, “Coordinated trajectory-tracking control of a marine aerial-surface heterogeneous system,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 3198–3210, 2021. [26] J. Dufek and R. Murphy, “Visual pose estimation of rescue unmanned surface vehicle from unmanned aerial system,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. 6, p. 42, 2019. [27] Y. Wang, W. Liu, J. Liu, and C. Sun, “Cooperative USV–UAV marine search and rescue with visual navigation and reinforcement learning-based control,” ISA Transactions , vol. 137, pp. 222–235, 2023. [28] T. Huang, Z. Chen, W. Gao, Z. Xue, and Y. Liu, “A USV-UAV cooperative trajectory planning algorithm with hull dynamic constraints,” 

Sensors , vol. 23, no. 4, p. 1845, 2023. [29] X. Wang, J. Liu, and Q. Zhou, “Real-time multi-target localization from unmanned aerial vehicles,” Sensors , vol. 17, no. 1, p. 33, 2017. [30] M. Wang, Y. Liu, D. Su, Y. Liao, L. Shi, J. Xu, and J. Valls Miro, “Accurate and real-time 3-D tracking for the following robots by fusing vision and ultrasonar information,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 997–1006, 2018. [31] D. Tang, Q. Fang, L. Shen, and T. Hu, “Onboard detection-tracking-localization,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1555–1565, 2020. [32] L. S. Saoud, Z. Jia, S. Yang, M. U. Din, L. Seneviratne, S. He, and I. Hussain, “Prioritized real-time UAV-based vessel detection for efficient maritime search,” Journal of Field Robotics , vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 561–577, 2025. [33] H. H. Helgesen, T. H. Bryne, E. F. Wilthil, and T. A. Johansen, “Camera-based tracking of floating objects using fixed-wing UAVs,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems , vol. 102, no. 4, 2021. [34] R. He, Y. Xuan, H. Cui, P. Li, and H. Chen, “CIBVS: Continuous image-based visual servoing against visual signal loss,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , pp. 1–12, 2026, early Access. [35] Y. Dong, M. U. Din, F. Lagala, H. Kuang, J. Sun, S. Yang, I. Hussain, and S. He, “Drone carrier: An integrated unmanned surface vehicle for autonomous inspection and intervention in GNSS-denied maritime environment,” Journal of Ocean Engineering and Science , 2026.